༄༅།།བོད་ཀྱི་ནང་བསྟན་དཔེ་ཚོགས་ལྟེ་གནས།།
Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center
Text Scan Input Form - Title Page
Work:
W1KG13795
2007341147
ImageGroup:
ISBN:
11KG15382
9788186227374, 8186227377
LCCN:
Title:
the pandita and the siddha
Author:
པྲཙ་ རམོན་
prats, ramon
Descriptor:
Original Publication:
n/a,n/a
Place:
dharamshala, h.p.
Publisher:
amnye machen institute
2007
Date:
Volume:
Total Volumes:
TBRC Pages:
1
n/a
Introductory Pages:
Text Pages:
Scanning Information:
n/a
Scanned at Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center, 1430 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA. Comments: 9/2013



THE PANDITA AND THE SIDDHA
TIBETAN STUDIES IN HONOUR OF E. GENE SMITH
EDITED BY RAMON N. PRATS
M
ཨ་མྱེས་རྨ་ཆེན་བོད་ཀྱི་རིག་གཞུང་ཞིབ་འཇུག་ཁང་།



THE PANDITA AND THE SIDDHA
TIBETAN STUDIES IN HONOUR OF E. GENE SMITH
EDITED BY RAMON N. PRATS
ཨ་མྱེས་རྨ་ཆེན་བོད་ཀྱི་རིག་གཞུང་ཞིབ་འཇུག་ཁང་།
Amnye Machen Institute
Dharamshala (H.P.) India
2007



The Pandita and the Siddha
Tibetan Studies in Honour of E. Gene Smith
Edited by Ramon N. Prats
Copyright © 2007: each author holds the copyright of his contribution to this book
AMI Books
are published by the Amnye Machen Institute
McLeod Ganj 176219 Dharamsala (H.P.) India
email: amnyemachen@rediffmail.com
phone: 0091-[O]1892-221441
ISBN 978-81-86227-37-4
Typesetting by Ram Krishna Dongol
Printed at Indraprastha Press (CBT)
4 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
without the prior permission of the authors.



Table of contents
Editor's Preface
Publisher's Note
John ARDUSSI
Notes on the rGyal rigs of Ngawang and the Clan History of Eastern Bhutan and Shar Mon
Christoph CÜPPERS
Registers and Account Books of the dGa'-Idan pho-brang Government
Lokesh CHANDRA
Concept of the Adibuddha
Bhagwan DASH
The Rgyud-bzhi and Their Basic Source
Franz-Karl EHRHARD
A Forgotten Incarnation Lineage: The Yol-mo-ba sPrul-skus (16th to 18th centuries)
David GERMANO
The Shifting Terrain of the Tantric Bodies of Buddhas and Buddhists from an Atiyoga Perspective
Amy HELLER
P.T. 7a, P.T. 108, P.T. 240 and Beijing bs Tan 'gyur 3489: Ancient Tibetan Rituals Dedicated
to Vairocana
Yoshiro IMAEDA
The Inscription(s) at 'Bis Rnam snang (Eastern Tibet)
David JACKSON
Painting Styles in the Rubin Collection: Identifications and Clarifications
Matthew T. KAPSTEIN
Tibetan Technologies of the Self, Part II: The Teachings of the Eight Great Conveyances
SAMTEN G. KARMAY
A Most Pleasing Symphony - An Unknown Biography of the Fifth Dalai Lama
Deborah KLIMBURG-SALTER
Kha-che lug and the Wood Sculptures from Charang
Dan MARTIN
Did Buddha Mean to Teach Tantras?
Eva K. NEUMAIER
The rMad du byung ba in Its Three Versions



Table of contents
Michael OPPITZ
Of Bone and Flesh
179
KARMA PHUNTSHO
'Ju Mi pham rNam rgyal Gya mtsho - His Position in the Tibetan Religious Hierarchy and a
Synoptic Survey of His Contributions
Françoise POMMARET
Recovering Identity: Students' Fieldwork in Bhutan
John Myrdhin REYNOLDS
Philosophical Systems and the Debate over Ideas in the Bonpo Mother Tantra
218
Matthieu RICARD
The Writings of Zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol (1781-1851). A Descriptive Catalogue
234
Heather STODDARD
A Preliminary Note on the "Rin.chen bZang.po Temples" of rKan.bzhi, Ladakh
254
TASHI TSERING
On the Dates of Thang stong rgyal po
268
Leonard W. J. VAN DER KUIJP
The Names of Gos Lo tsa ba Gzhon nu dpal (1392-1481)
279
Roberto VITALI
Historiographical Material on Early skyid-grong (Gathered from Local Documents and
bKa'-brgyud-pa Sources)
286
Akira YUYAMA
A Hitherto Unknown Version of the Prajna-päramita-ratna-guna-samcaya-gatha
304



Preface
I first met with Ellis Gene Smith in 1977, when I rang the doorbell of his beautiful house in South Extension,
New Delhi. I was accompanied by Raffaella, my wife, and we were led into a huge living hall by Mr. Smith's
assistant, Mangaram Ji, a young Indian man with whom we were soon to become very familiar. At the time,
Gene Smith was Deputy Director of the U.S. Library of Congress Field Office in India and I was a doctoral
candidate in Tibetan studies for the "Orientale" University of Naples, where I conducted my studies under
Professor Namkhai Norbu, Rinpoche, whom I followed also as a disciple. I bore a letter that Professor
Luciano Petech, my thesis supervisor, had written to introduce me to the celebrated American scholar and I
conveyed to him also Prof. Norbu's regards. That was the beginning of a long and enriching relationship that
soon developed into an abiding friendship with the man who more than anyone else has contributed
decisively to the preservation and accessibility of Tibetan literature since the 1950s. From that very first
meeting, a new dimension of research - in which the profusion of Tibetan texts would play a central role -
began to unfold before me, adding to the linguistic and religious teaching I had received from Rinpoche and
the strict methodology I had learned under Prof. Petech. Gene Smith's encyclopedic knowledge (Lokesh
Chandra defined him once as "a library on foot"), along with his unfailing kindness, proverbial generosity,
and unstinting help, were and still are unique. It is my hope that my contribution as editor of this book in
his honor, modest a contribution though it may be, may serve as a small token of my deep admiration,
esteem, and gratitude.
Just like me, many other specialists in the field of Tibetan studies at large are indebted to Gene Smith
in various and multiple ways. The fond memories of him written by some of the authors of this volume bear
fervent witness to this.
The idea of preparing a Felicitation Volume to commemorate E. Gene Smith's sixty-fifth birthday was
discussed by a group of his closest friends and colleagues during the Ninth Seminar of the International
Association for Tibetan Studies held in Leiden in June 2000. The project met with an enthusiastic reply. Yet
with little more than a year left before the book was to be presented, time proved too short. By the summer of
2001 only a CD-ROM with a preliminary editing of the articles could be prepared, and this was presented to him.
After that, the publication of the miscellany entered a long, tortuous journey that was halted by a number
of vicissitudes, the saddest of which was the untimely death of William Hintnan (one of my employers at
Sky Dancer Press and a supporter of Gene Smith's institute, the Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center), who had
agreed to sponsor the publication of the volume personally. Finally, five years later, older and hopefully -
wiser, we are able to assemble metaphorically in this pages and present Gene Smith with an edition of The
Pandita and the Siddha as a tribute of our high esteem and affection.
Tibetologists - and Tibetans - owe E. Gene Smith much more than can be conveyed in a few words. His
unusual career as the world's leading scholar of Tibetan and Buddhist literature began in 1960 at the
University of Washington, Seattle, where he enrolled as a graduate student in the Inner Asia project of the
Far Eastern and Russian Institute. He studied there with notable scholars such as Turrell V. Wylie, Edward
Conze, Joseph F. Rock, Nicholas Poppe, and above all with Dezhung Rinpoche, a fine Buddhist erudite and
exponent of the Tibetan cultural heritage. This venerable lama was one of the eight Tibetan political refugees
of the aristocratic Sakyapa family who, like many other thousands of Tibetans, had fled their homeland in
1959. The Sakyapa group had been initially invited to the United States for a three-year cultural research
project conducted at the University of Washington under the auspices of a Rockefeller Foundation grant
(other eight academic centers worldwide were also funded during the same time period by the Rockefeller
Foundation to promote Tibetan studies). Yet Gene Smith not only followed Dezhung Rinpoche at the
University: he lived in fact, the only Westerner, in the Sakyapa home in Seattle. The advantages of such a
full immersion in a Tibetan framework were really remarkable for Gene-La. "If you want to learn a
language, stay around children - they never hesitate to correct you! - and women - they are used to speaking
to children," he would advise me years later. Gene absorbed Tibetan Buddhism and culture from Rinpoche



Preface
and his associates until 1964, when he completed his Ph.D. qualifying exams and moved to the State
University of Leiden for advanced studies in Sanskrit. However, resource materials in the Tibetan language
were very limited at the time, and Gene's quest for original texts led him to their source. The following year
he was awarded a Ford Foundation grant to travel to India and Nepal in order to study and conduct research
with some of the great lamas of the different Tibetan Buddhist traditions. Among these were Drukpa Thukse
Rinpoche, Khenpo Noryang, and Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche. Gene's fieldwork included scouring the rare
book collections, libraries, and archives of Buddhist monasteries and temples as well as some of the private
collections of the Lamas- an activity that decisively marked, and matched, his academic inclination. Having
decided to remain in India to further his fieldwork, in 1968 he joined the United States' Library of Congress
(L.C.) Overseas Operations Division in New Delhi as Tibetan acquisition expert and cataloger. His progress
there was nothing short of brilliant and he was appointed its Field Director in 1980. Through his painstaking
effort and personal encouragement, the L.C. developed the PL-480 program set in 1963 to support the
reprinting and acquisition of rare Tibetan and Himalayan manuscripts and xylographs that were
subsequently distributed to twenty subscribing institutions throughout the United States. By the 1970s, this
trend had proven seminal for the growth of Tibetan studies as a serious academic discipline in American as
well as European universities. Having heard of the program overseen by the already renowned Gene-La,
Tibetan refugees or members of the Tibetan-speaking communities in the Himalayan areas in India, Nepal,
Sikkim, and Bhutan visited him day after day, bringing to his knowledgeable attention and careful
examination many literary treasures that under other circumstances would simply have vanished. Under
Gene Smith's aegis, the rich Tibetan literary heritage found protectorate status and began to become accessible.
It was in those years that Gene Smith's successive homes in New Delhi became a legendary institute of
sorts for many visiting scholars and serious students or researchers from all over the world. Gene was unique
not only for his exceptional hospitality but also for sharing his huge and growing library and especially for
sharing his unmatched knowledge of Tibetan letters, his constant mentoring, and unstinting assistance
(oftentimes in the form of books, if not his personal notes) to different generations of Tibetologists.
More than 5,000 works in the Tibetan language on traditional Buddhist religious literature, art, history,
poetry, biographies, linguistics, medicine, Bon, etc., were published under the PL-480 program until 1985,
when Gene Smith left India for Jakarta to direct the L.C. Southeast Asian program. In 1994 he was assigned
to the L.C. Middle Eastern Office in Cairo, where he remained until he took carly retirement in February
1997. After a brief tenure in New York City as consultant to the Trace Foundation to establish the Himalayan
and Inner Asian Resources, Gene Smith and a group of friends and colleagues founded the Tibetan Buddhist
Resource Center (www.TBRC.org) in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in December 1999. Gene's long-cherished
project relocated to New York City in 2002, where it is now associated with the Rubin Museum of Art.
Through his post as Executive Director, he is tirelessly leading the impressive TBRC project of digitizing
thousands of texts and reference materials, and building a database on the field that is of incalculable value.
A reflection of Gene Smith's outstanding command of Tibetan Buddhist literature are the scholarly
introductions, prefaces, and elaborated lists of contents that he authored during his years in India to
accompany the reproduction of a large number of Tibetan texts, which constitute a precious resource for any
researcher. A selection was published in 2001 under the title Among Tibetan Texts: History and Literature of
the Himalayan Plateau (Boston: Wisdom Publications), a magnum opus of modern Tibetology. In addition
to these, several more of his introductory writings - not all of which bear Gene Smith's name explicitly -
deserve to be considered. Though much shorter, they are no less valuable. To list only a few:
Sa gsum na mgon par mesho ba rdo rje sgra dbyangs gling gi zhal 'don bskang gso'i rim pa phyogs gcig tu
bsgrigs pa'i ngo mtshar nor bu'i 'phreng ba skal bzang gzhon nu'i mgul rgyan: The collected liturgical
texts of Gnas-chung Rdo-rje-sgra-dbyangs-gling, the residence of the State Oracle of Tiber. Gangtok:
Sonam T. Kazi (Ngagyur Nyingmay Sungrab, 3), 1969, pp. 1-4.
The Collected Writings (sung-'bum) of 'Bri-gung Chos-rje Vig-rten-mgon-po Rin-chen-dpal (5 vols.). New
Delhi: Khangsar Tulku, Vol. 1, 1969, pp. 1-4.



Preface
vii
Collected Works of Thu'u-bkwan Blo-bzang-chos-kvi-nyi-ma (10 vols.). Delhi: Ngawang Gelek Demo, 1969,
Vol. 1, pp. 1-12 and Appendixes, pp. 1-7.
Three Karchacks: Lha ldan sprul pa'i gtsug lag khang gi dkar chag shel dkar me long (1645) by the Fifth
Dalai Lama Ngag-dbang-blo-bzang-rgya-mtsho - Grwa sa chen po bzhi dang rgyud pa stod smad
chags tshul pad dkar phreng ba (1744) by Phur-bu-lcog Ngag-dhang-byams-pa- and Gangs can gi
ljongs su bka' dang bstan bcos sogs kyi glegs bam spar gzhi ji ltar yod pa rnam nas dkar chag spar
thor phyogs tsam du bkod pa phan bde'i pad tshal 'byed pa'i nyin byed. New Delhi: Ngawang Gelek
Demo (Gedan Sungrab Minyam Gyunphel Series, 13), 1970, pp. 1-6.
Buryat Annotations on the Lam rim. New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture (ſata-pitaka
Series, 97), 1973, pp. 1-3.
The production of The Pandita and the Siddha is indebted to those authors who have contributed articles to
the present volume. As editor, I wish to express my gratitude to each of them. Special thanks are due also to
Tashi Tsering, Director of the Amnye Machen Institute (McLeod Ganj, Dharamsala), who took on the
responsibility of publisher. And finally, many thanks to Roberto Vitali who not only acted as a most effective
and decisive link on behalf of the Amnye Machen Institute, but also collaborated and helped untiringly in
many ways throughout all these years to keep the project ongoing until its very final stage.
Ramon N. Prats
Barcelona
February 2006



Publisher's Note
In June 2000, at the Ninth IATS Conference in Leiden, Dr. Ramon Prats and I revived the idea of dedicating
a Festschrift to Gene Smith and decided to bring it out on the occasion of his 65 birthday. The decision
brought to an end several years of consultations with some of Gene's friends and colleagues. I felt a
Festschrift was an appropriate homage to his knowledge and integrity which I came to appreciate during the
many years of our interaction.
This began in 1979, when, at the behest of the late Rai Bahadur T. D. Densapa (Burmiok Athing), OBE of
Sikkim, then the doyen of Tibetan Studies in the Indian Subcontinent, and of his son Tashi Densapa (presently
the Director of the Namgyal Institute of Tibetology in Gangtok), I was assisting and interpreting for Prof.
Emeritus Franz Michael and Prof. Eugene Kenez during their field research based on Max Weber theory and
the Tibetan theocracy. We interviewed Tibetan scholars and elders in Rajpur, Mussoorie and Ladakh.
It was upon completion of this research phase that I first chanced upon meeting the legendary Gene
Smith. I was also invited to the dinner he hosted in honour of the Professors on 30 July 1979 at D-29 South
Extension Part II, his residence in New Delhi. Like several other scholars I began then to be acquainted with
his untiring efforts in preserving Tibetan literature.
The field of Tibetan and Buddhist studies is indebted to Gene for his central role in initiating the
publishing of Tibetan texts in the subcontinent from the mid-1960s under the Library of Congress PL-480
program. It was through Gene's guidance and encouragement as Field Director of the Library's South Asian
headquarters that individuals in the Tibetan Diaspora started reproducing and publishing ancient Tibetan
literature. Between the mid-1960s and 1985 at least 6,000 titles of Tibetan works, some of which comprised
up to thirty volumes, were published.
Through revitalizing the Library of Congress Acquisition Program of Tibetan books from the
Diaspora and Sikkimese, Ladakhi, Mongolian and Bhutanese publishers, Gene collected and made
available a diverse and indispensable corpus of materials for the understanding and advancement of
Tibetan Studies internationally.
After Gene left Delhi in September 1985 the program was halted but his commitment never wavered
and he returned to Delhi to help the new Field Director re-establish it in 1990. It was on his suggestion that
I acted as a consultant for the Tibetan Program to the Library of Congress in New Delhi.
Gene's ground-breaking role at encouraging the Tibetan Diaspora to publish their literature in the Indian
subcontinent even had an indirect impact within China. In July 1982 the PRC government for the first time
allowed their Tibetologists to participate in the 2nd IATS Conference at Columbia University, New York. At
the conference, the scholars and government authorities from China were amazed to see for the first time the
number of volumes of Tibetan works reproduced in exile and were urged to establish a competing program.
In the following years the PRC experienced a resurgence in the publication of Tibetan texts.
Following his early retirement, Gene's pioneering work in Tibetan Studies has continued with his
creation of the Tibetan Buddhist Resource Centre (TBRC) in New York. He has tirelessly located, collected
and scanned thousands of rare and not so rare texts from Tibet, China, India and Nepal, using his own
collection as a starting point, to make them digitally available to scholars worldwide. To date, TBRC's
Digital Library holds a vast fully searchable archive of approximately 4 million images.
Whether in lengthy articles, well written and informative introductions or other works, when it comes
to acknowledging help from fellow scholars or teachers, Gene Smith is the finest example of intellectual
honesty among all Tibetologists and Buddhist scholars. And when it comes upon him to help fellow scholars,
his non-attachment to the most rare and important literary works leads him to share his material and findings,
always of the highest standard, with anyone who needs them. Indeed from the mid-1960s to September 1985
Gene's place was an open house, meeting point and haven for all scholars and students of Tibetan,
Himalayan, Nepalese and Indian studies.



Publisher's Note
Since my first meeting with him almost thirty years ago, Gene has a been a personal mentor and a source of
great inspiration. I was priviledged to offer him a small token of my appreciation when I was the Head of
the Publication Department of LTWA. The Biography of the First Tre Hor Khang gsar Skyabs mgon Blo
bzang Tshul khrims Bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan (1838-1897) was dedicated to him on the occasion of his 60th
birthday. I wrote then:
This volume is dedicated to the foremost bibliographer of Tibetan texts,
E.Gene Smith, on his sixtieth bithday,
for opening up the literary treasures of Tibet to the rest of the world
and for his preeminent contribution to the advancement of Tibetan and Buddhist studies.
Now, it is for his knowledge of Tibetan culture and boundless altruism in sharing information and texts that
I am publishing this volume in his honour.
I close with a few matters about this Festschrift. I felt particularly honoured when Ramon Prats asked
me in August 2002 to take up publication of the volume at the Amnye Machen Institute. I gladly accepted
to publish it as a small personal sign of my gratitude towards Gene.
The release of the volume comes after a long time, delayed as it was by several practical problems which
prevented the editor from delivering the final draft. In the meantime the contributors were asked to make
any changes they deemed necessary to their articles. The final version was delivered in March 2006, but
pending work for that year and a few technical problems encountered by the printer led to a final layout only
in early 2007.
I wish to thank here the contributors, on behalf of the editor too, for their patience and
understanding. They have waited for so long. So has Gene, who never asked me about the book. My
gratitude also goes to Ven. Mathieu Ricard who has been so kind to cover part of the publication costs
and to Dr. Richard Whitecross who volunteered his services when the editor thought that the English of
some articles should be checked, which in the end was not necessary. Many thanks also to Indraprastha
Press (New Delhi) for volunteering a rough first layout in Summer 2007. Finally I would like to thank
my old friend Robi Vitali for putting so much of his time into keeping the project alive, finding solutions
when the book was at a standstill and for making the Festschrift ready today. Without his help the book
would have not seen the light of day.
The reader is kindly requested to note that the stylistic idiosyncrasies used by each author have been
preserved as in their original articles. The classic criterion of making notes, italics, transliterations or
bibliographies consistent throughout the volume has been dropped in light of the fact that every author has
reasons to opt for the solutions they favour.
Tashi Tsering



NOTES ON THE RGYAL RIGS OF NGAWANG AND
THE CLAN HISTORY OF EASTERN BHUTAN AND SHAR MON
John Ardussi
(Issaquah, Washington)
It is a distinct pleasure to join in honoring Gene Smith, one of the most influential scholars to emerge from
the Tibetan Studies program of our alma mater, the University of Washington. Gene's contribution to
Tibetology needs no introduction, but it may not be as widely known that he was also a pioneer of research
on Bhutan. In the late '70s, Gene sponsored the reprinting of many rare works from the private libraries of
Bhutan and Sikkim, and even wrote an outline for a Bhutanese history which, with characteristic generosity,
he shared with colleagues. I therefore dedicate this small article to commemorate Gene's contributions to
Bhutan studies.
Some twenty years ago, the text known as the rGyal rigs was first brought to the attention of Himalayan
specialists by Michael Aris, based on an edition and pioneering translation of a single manuscript.' Since
then, more editions and manuscripts have become available, raising new questions about its authorship and
date. The purpose of this paper is to review some of these issues in the context of the document's importance
for the history of Bhutan and Tibet.
Background
The text known by its abbreviated title the rGyal rigs (more fully: Gyal rigs 'yung khungs gsal ba'i ngron
me "The Lamp which Illuminates the Origins of Royal Families") is a history of the former clan lineages
and ruling families of eastern Bhutan and Shar Mon or "Eastern Mon," which is an old name for the
Tibetanized portion of West Kameng district, Arunachal Pradesh (including what is now called the Tawang
Corridor). These people have a quite different background from the western Bhutanese, and the Gyal rigs
is the single best source on their origins. Its underlying theme is the celebration of a class system in which
the institutions of kingship and clan nobility are held to be the natural order of mankind. Thus, it traces the
ancestry of many leading families of these districts to princes of the Yarlung dynasty of early Tibet, in
particular to Lha-sras gTsang-ma, elder brother of the celebrated Buddhist king Ral-pa-can, and some even
to his notorious younger brother Glang Dar-ma, the alleged destroyer of the dynasty. The author of the rGyal
rigs was a Bhutanese monk from Tashigang near the border with Shar Mon, who belonged to one of these
lineages and wrote under the patronage of their chiefs. He was known only as Ngawang (Ngag-dbang)
"monk of the Byar clan," but his full identity remains obscure. We may recall that the most celebrated Shar
1. Aris 1979, pt. V microfiche supplement
2. We are dealing here with a mixture of ethnographic names and geographic toponyms that have evolved over many
centuries. The Mon-pa were an ancient Tibetan, or Tibetanized population group, located in the cis-Himalayan
districts from Nepal eastwards, but concentrated mainly in Bhutan and districts to the east. They apparently
preceded the coming of that layer of society which traces its ancestry to Lha-sras gTsang-ma and about whom the
Gyal rigs was written. The vaguely defined term "Mon Yul," however, meaning the land occupied by the Mon-pa
people, emerged gradually as the name of a specific region divided into Lho Mon, "Southern Mon" (corresponding
roughly to what is now western and central Bhutan), and Shar Mon or "Eastern Mon," which before the 17th century
may have included parts of what is now eastern Bhutan, although the ancient dividing line is imprecisely known.
In this article, we use the term "Shar Mon" to refer specifically to the Mon-pa territories east of present-day Bhutan.
In the late 17th century Mon Yul became the name of a specific geographic district of Tibet, bordering on eastern
Bhutan. To complicate matters even further, the terms Shar-phyogs, "the East," and Shar-phyogs-pa (pron.
"Sharchop"), "the Easterners," are names still used unofficially to describe the areas and people speaking the
Tshangla language, in what are now eastern Bhutan. Tibetan Mon Yul and West Kameng in India, emphasizing their
common ancestry as described in the Gval rigs (see also George van Driem 1998] Dzongkha, Leiden. Research
School CNWS: pp. 27 fr.).



John Ardussi
Mon-pa in Tibetan history was the 6th Dalai Lama, whose mother belonged to the "royal family" of Ber-
mkhar which, according to the Gyal rigs, claimed descent from Lha-sras g Tsang-ma.
In 1986, Michael Aris republished in book form. his earlier (and less accessible) 1979 microfiche edition
and translation of the Gyal rigs on which he based several chapters of his study Bhutan the Early History of
a Himalayan Kingdom. The two identical versions derived from a single manuscript prepared for Aris in 1971
by a Bhutanese civil servant and scholar from Tashigang named Dasho Tenzin Dorje (Drag-shos bs Tan-'dzin
Do-rje). In 1984, Tenzin Dorje completed his own edition of the rGyal rigs, but it was not published in
Bhutan until the following year. Aris (1986) had only just been printed when Dorje's little book came into
Michael's hands, revealing some significant gaps in the text that he had just published. He therefore inserted
a loose page of Addenda and Corrigenda in his book, which included a large piece of missing text along with
a comment "The full implications of this new edition for my own work must await detailed study." But
Michael Aris never addressed in writing the issues raised by Dorje's book, before his untimely death in 1999.
As it turns out, the missing passage is crucial to establishing the date of the rGyal rigs.
Besides Aris (1979, 1986), three other versions of the rGya rigs are now available. The first of these by
Tenzin Dorje, as already noted, was evidently based on the same original MS as the hand copy prepared
for Aris, but lacks many of the latter's accidental omissions of text and other copyist's errors. It also utilized
additional source documents, and we have therefore treated it as an independent edition. Another version of
the rGyal rigs was published in Beijing in 1988, based on a manuscript in the State Archives of the TAR.?
The same publication contains a rather politicized historical analysis of the rGyal rigs and the Mon Yul
question by the well known author/editor Chab-spel Tshe-brtan Phun-tshogs. Finally, a photocopy of an old
dbu-can MS of the rGyal rigs was obtained from Bomdila, Arunachal Pradesh, by the Tibet House Library,
New Delhi, of which a duplicate photocopy is located in the Library of Tibetan Works and Archives,
Dharamsala. Counting all known published versions and bibliographic items, we thus have six separate
documents to work with, based on what we are treating as four original sources, all recently indexed in Dan
Martin's Tibetan Histories. They are listed here for convenient reference.
Editions and MSS of the rGyal rigs
1) Aris (1986) = Sa skyong rgyal po'i gdung rabs 'hyung khungs dang 'bangs kyi mi rabs chad tshul nges
par gsal ba'i sgron me. The Aris MS is in 54 dbu-can folios measuring approx. 35 x 85 cms. Author:
Byar gyi bande Wa-gindra (Aris: "the monk Ngag-dbang (Wa-gindra) of the Byar clan"). Date: sa pho
3. Aris 1989: pp. 113 f. It is somewhat challenging to the authority of the Gyal rigs that De-srid gSang-rgyas Gya-
mtsho, in his biography of the 6th Dalai Lama, does not mention Lha-sras gTsang-ma as this family's royal progenitor.
Instead, he cites two different traditions tracing the mother's ancestry to other Tibetan princes: either prince Nya-khri.
one of the three sons of the early Tibetan king Gri-gum bТsan-po, or else the fabled Tibetan exile "prince" known by
the unfortunate nickname Khyi-kha Rathod (on whom see Aris 1979: pp. 60 ff) (sDe-srid Sangs-rgyas Gya-mtsho.
Thams cad mkhyen pa drug pa blo bzang rin chen Ishangs dbyangs rgya mitsho'i thun mong phwili mam par thar pa
du ku lali phro 'thud rah gsal gser gvi snye ma. Lhasa: Bod-ljongs mi-dmangs dpe skrun-khang, 1989, p. 149). If the
"detailed records of this family's history (referred to by Ngawang as the omitted section [2.1] of the rGyal rigs, on
which see Tables 1 and 2 and the discussion below) still existed in 1668, and if they truly supported Ngawang's
historical argument for the ancestral unity of the Mon-pa people, then the sDe-srid ought to have had access to them
and reported that fact in preparing his biography of the 6th Dalai Lama, less than forty years later.
4. Aris 1986: Sources for the History of Bhutan, pp. 12-85.
5. Aris 1986: addendum to p. 24.
6. Dorje 1984.
7. This edition will be referred to hereafter as Lhasa (1988).
8. Chab-spel Tshe-brtan Phun-tshogs (1988). "Mon yul ni sngar nas krung go'i mnga' khongs yin pa'i lo rgvus dpang
rugs,"contained in Padma bsKal-bzang & Blo-bzang Tshe-brtan (1988), pp. 1-9.
9. In addition to the works cited here, a translation of Dorje (1984) by Khenpo Phuntsok Tashi and Chris Butters was
completed (but never published in 1992 for the National Library of Bhutan (Martin 1997: p. 122). I have not
examined this work.



Notes on the rGyal rigs of Ngawang and the Clan History
spre'i lo hor zla brgyad pa'i yar tshes bzang po (Aris: = 1728). Presumably, this MS will be deposited
among the Aris papers at Oxford University. See Martin (1997), entry no. 265A.
14) Aris (1979) = Pt. V, microfilm supplement of Aris 1979. Said by Aris to be identical to Aris (1986), but
published in microfiche and lacking the added word index. Technically, this is the first edition, however
I have not located a copy for examination
2) Dorje (1984) = Bod rje mnga' bdag khri ral pa can gyi sku mched thu sras gtsang ma'i gdung brgyud
phel rabs dang 'bangs kyi mi rahs mched khungs lo rgyus gsal ba'i sgron me. Small printed book from
Bhutan, with no English title page. Author: bs Tan-'dzin rDo-rje from Tashigang. Date: 1984. (The copy
indexed in Martin (1997) as entry no. 265C had an English title page added for the benefit of the U.S.
Library of Congress catalogers, showing that it was published by Lama Rigzin Norbu in Thimphu,
1985.)
3) Lhasa (1988) = Rje 'bangs rnams kyi rigs rus kyi 'byung khungs gsal bali sgron me (Mon chos 'byung)
zhes bya ba bzhugs so. Contained in Padma Kal-bzang & Blo-bzang Tshe-brtan, eds., (1988) Bod kyi lo
rgyus rig gnas dpyad gzhi'i rgyu cha bdams bsgrigs (No. 1, General Series no. 10). Beijing, Mi-rigs dpe-
skrun knang, pp. 87-130. Reputed authors: Lha-btsun Ngag-dbang Phun-tshogs and Phyi-tshang Mong-
khar-gyi rgyal-po. Date: none stated. The separate colophons of the individual sections preserve the more
familiar title Rgyal rigs 'byung khungs gsal bai sgron me. The anonymous editor's preface tells us only
that the source MS came from the state archives of the TAR (Bod rang skyong ljongs yig tshags khang).
See Martin (1997), entry no. 675.
4) TibH = Gangs can bod du rje rgyal gnya' khri bisan/ srong btsan sgam po khri srong Ide'u btsan dang/
Iho phyogs mon du lha sras gtsang ma zhes/rnam par sprul pa'i skyes/ mchog de rnams kvi/ gong ma
rje'i gdung rabs 'hyung khungs dang/ 'og ma 'bangs kyi mi rabs chad Ishul sogs/ngle)s par gsal bar
sgron me bzhugs soll. Photocopy of an dbu-can MS in 50 folios, located in Tibet House, New Delhi.
(However, the same illegible or missing folios from LTWA (see 4.a) can be faintly read in this photocopy:
they are in a different handwriting). Author (f. 49b): Byar gyi bandhe Wa-gindra (= Ngag-dbang). Date
(f. 50a): sa pho spre'i lo hor zla brgyad pa'i yar Ishes bzang po. An unknown Tibetan has added in cursive
script above the date, the comment: rab byung 12/ phyi lo 1728, i.e. "12th cycle, western year 1728."
Added to the bottom of f. 50a of this manuscript and of LTWA are three additional lines, barely legible,
the first in dbu-med, and the last two in a different cursive hand, containing the following text:"!
[L-1] Rigs rus kyi 'byung khungs rnam dag 'di nyid/ sa lug lo'i hor zla xxxxx bris bu shus [sic: bshus) pa
dge'o/ bkra shis/
[L-2) Bse ruli yul ljong/s] lte bar yod par brten nas skyabs mgon sprul sku me long rin po che'i ming
brtag pa yin/bkra shis shog//
[L-3] xxxxx.
(L-1: "This complete copy of the Rigs rus kyi 'byung khungs was copied in the xxxx month of the Earth-
Sheep year. Virtue! Good luck!"
L-2: "Examined by H.H. Trulku Melong Rinpoche, on the basis (of another MS) located in central bSe-
ru district. Good fortune!"12
L-3: [illegible])
Date: The Earth-Sheep year of this copy could be 1739, 1799, or 1859. There is no way at present to
guess which is correct. This photocopy is not indexed in Martin (1997).
10. The Director of Tibet House in Delhi, Doboom Tulku, kindly provided me a photocopy of this text in 1996. All
references in this article to the MSS labeled TibH and LTWA are based on this copy.
11. Only L-1 is fully legible on my copy. The reading for L-2 is a tentative composite of information kindly supplied
to me by Lobsang Shastri of LTWA and Lama Doboom Tulku of Tibet House, based on their interpretations of the
copies in their collections. The portions marked by "X" including the entire L-3 are illegible to any of us.
12.bSe-ru, along with Shar-tsho and Ha'u, are the three villages (tsho) that make up La-og Yul-gsum district near
Tawang monastery (Bai curya der po: 396; Lha-klu Tshe-dbang-rdo-rje 1988: 12). I concur with Doboom Tulku
that both L-2 and L-3 were written at a later date, and have nothing to do with the copying of the MS.



John Ardussi
4a) LTWA13= Duplicate photocopy of 4), located in The Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, MS no. Ka
10-5845 (38 ff., pp. 45-47 said to be missing or illegible). Author and date: same as TibH (Martin: =
1728). See Martin (1997), entry no. 265B.
The Structure of the rGyal rigs
The rGyal rigs, as we now have it, is a somewhat composite work, consisting of a central core and several
supplements. Within the core, however, certain sections were expanded in some versions to provide details
on family lines that were omitted from others. This is consistent with its character as a 300-year old
genealogical history shared by many clans and families, in different political jurisdictions. By comparing
these supplements and conflated sections, I believe that we can establish what may have been the original
core and the reasons for the differences. This will lead us, finally, to reconsider the question of its authorship
and the date and reasons for its composition.
All four source versions of the rGyal rigs consist of five numbered chapters, plus one or more
colophons, poems and supplements. Table 1 lists all of these, along with a summary of their contents based
on the chapter colophons. Sections and subsections lacking numbering in the original have been assigned
numbers, shown in brackets. Table 2 is an index of the sections and colophons, showing which ones are
included in each source.
Our first observation on the data in Table 2 is the consistency with which all versions preserve the poems
[O] and [6], the author's colophon (7), and the core chapters numbered identically 1-5.14 A close reading of
the versions also shows them to be highly faithful to a common text. Based on this fact and the similar style
of writing, I believe that we can safely consider these sections to constitute the original Gyal rigs, or
something very close to it. There are the usual problems of spelling errors and the accidental omission of
words and passages. But these are to be expected in a manuscript tradition such as this. The rGyal rigs is a
purely secular document, and one can imagine the process by which copies must have been borrowed and
recopied many times, in order to satisfy the desire of individual families to own one. The problems of Aris
(1979/1986) are exactly of this type.
Section
Table 1:
Gyal rigs - Sections and Colophons
[0.] Introductory poem -
1. On the spread of the human race in Tibet, the invitation of a lord-king (rje-dpon) and the spread of Buddhism
2. How the families and clans descended from Lha-sras g Tsang-ma are given individual names, spread
throughout Lho Mon and become lord-chiefs (rje-dpon) in those districts
[2.1] Subsection on the family records of the Lha'u Kham(s)-pa Jo-bo of La-'og Yul-gsum
[2.2] Subsection on the family records of the Jo-bo of Shar sDe-rang and the Shar Grang-ma river valley
3. The ancestral origins of the gDung (families) of the four districts of Bumthang, central Bhutan
4. How the six "Vajra brothers" of Lha-lung dPal-gyi-rdo-rje and their descendants became the chiefs of
Lho Mon Shar-phyogs called Zhal-ngo Kheng-po
5. The origin of the common people beneath (the ruling families) and their family names
[6.] Author's concluding poem
[7.] Author's colophon
[8.] Dedicatory poem to the Three Jewels
[9.] Nine addenda on the ruling families of Beng-mkhar, gCen-mkhar, and the Yo-gdung Wang-ma
[10.) Author's colophon by Tenzin Dorje
13. Information on this document was supplied in an email dated 12/25/00 from Lobsang Shastri of LTWA. It is said
to come from Bomdila, Arunachal Pradesh. A comparison of hand writing on the last page, and other peculiarities,
confirm that it is the same manuscript as TibH.
14. The anonymous editor of Lhasa (1988) indicates (p. 87) that the contents of his original chs. 4 and 5 were mixed
up, and that he has corrected this (le'u bzhi pa dang Inga pa'i gong og dres 'dzol bskyar bsgrigs), along with other
obvious errors corrected in brackets. All other errors or uncertain readings, he states, were left as in the original.



Notes on the Gyal rigs of Ngawang and the Clan History
Section
[0.)
TibH. LTWA
ff. 1b-3a
ff. 3a-9b
ff. 9b-36a
f. 27a "details
excluded"
ff. 27b-32a
[2.1]
[2.2]
Table 2: Gyal-rigs - Index of Sections and Colophons
Aris (1979, 1986) Dorje (1984) Lhasa (1988)
f. 1b-4b5
pp. 2-3
pp. 87-89
ff. 5a-10a
pp. 3-16
pp. 89-95
ff. 10a-32a
pp. 16-64
pp. 95-117
f. 28b "details
p. 50 "details p. 110 "details
excluded"
excluded"
excluded"
f. 29a "records
pp. 51-59
pp. 110-115
unavailable"
ff. 32a-40a
pp. 64-78
pp. 117-124
ff. 40a-43b
pp. 78-83
pp. 124-126
ff. 43b-46b
pp. 83-88
pp. 126-129
ff. 46b-47a
pp. 88-89
pp. 129-130
ff. 47a-48a
pp. 89-90
p. 130 (abbreviated)
ff. 48a-b
pp. 90-91
missing
ff. 486-54a
pp. 91-101
missing
NA
p. 101
ΝΑ
ff. 369-43a
ff. 43a-46a
ff. 46a-48b
ff. 48b-49a
ff. 49a-50a
missing
missing
NA
[7.]
[8.]
[9.]
[10]
The structure of chapter 2, I believe, is key to interpreting the remaining differences among the various
editions. Chapter 2 is by far the longest section. It consists of a complex series of interlocking genealogies
covering the different branch families claiming descent from Lha-sras gTsang-ma. These families are said
to have descended from two sons of g Tsang-ma, and spread widely from districts bordering India in south
central Bhutan to Tibetan areas throughout Shar Mon. The Bhutanese branch descended from gCes-bu
mThong-legs-btsan, who maintained control of gTsang-ma's ancestral estate at a place called Mi-zim-pa."?
The eastern branch in Shar Mon descended from the other son, Lha'i dbang-phyug. Each of the six clans and
major subfamilies of these two branches is portrayed as having been formed when various local people and
their ministers, "lacking a lord-chief" (rje dpon), invited a descendant in one of the royal lines to serve their
community in that capacity by building a castle (mkhar) and producing a line of male descendants by a local
wife. More than twenty individual branch families are so described, in addition to others that terminated for
various reasons.
Section [2.1] constituted a detailed story of the original family branch in Shar Mon called the Jo-bo clan
of La-'og Yul-gsum. It was specifically excluded, the author states, because it could already be found in other
published records (deb ther yig cha la gsal bas 'dir ma bkod).19 Thus, only a summary of these events is
provided in the rGyal rigs.
The treatment of section [2.2] on the Jo-bo ruling family of sDe-rang ('Di-rang)20 is a different matter.
The manuscript edited by Aris states that (f. 28b) "as for the details, I have neither seen the records nor heard
the oral accounts, and so have not written them here" (zhib par ni yig cha dang gtam rgyud mthong thos med
pa las 'dir ma bkod). Our other three sources do not have this phrase. Instead, they reproduce a common text
15. Aris 1986, p. 14 indicates that the page numbering in his text is "muddled."
16. A third lineage is briefly mentioned for western Bhutan, but the rGyal rigs scarcely deals with it. See Aris 1979:
pp. 88 f.
17. Mi-zim-pa (or Pho-brang Mi-zim.mkhar, as the name is given by sDe-srid Sangs-rgyas Gya-mtsho, op. cit.: 49)
was the ancestral estate and site of a castle in eastern Bhutan ascribed to the exiled Tibetan prince IHa-sras g Tsang.
ma, son of Sad-na-legs. It is identified nowadays with ruins at Jamkhar near Tashigang.
18. See the detailed genealogy in Aris 1979: facing p. 98.
19. To my knowledge, no such written source predating the Gyal rigs has yet emerged from libraries in Tibet, Kameng
or eastern Bhutan.
20. Dirang Dzong in West Kameng, Arunachal Pradesh, is located about 12 km west of Bomdila, and an equal distance
cast of the Bhutan border



John Ardussi
containing extensive genealogical information on both the pre-existing families of Dirang and the coming
of prince g Tsang-ma's descendant to serve as their rje-dpon. Between these three sources there are numerous
differences in punctuation and the spelling of names. In general TibH seems to contain the best readings and
Dorje (1984) the worst. The manuscript of Lhasa (1988) seems generally to lie between these two, and was
probably also obtained from somewhere in Shar Mon.
An issue related to the conflation of internal segments is that of the supplements [9] found only in Aris
(1979, 1986) and Dorje (1984). These supplements appear to relate to the activities of now forgotten local
rulers from districts of southeastern Bhutan, on both sides of the modern border with India (the region of the
so-called "Duars" or passes between the plains and the mountains of Bhutan). They are of a very local flavor,
as already noted by Aris, and the language is much more rustic than the earlier core of the rGyal rigs. It is
not known when or by whom these supplements were added to the Gyal rigs. It is possible that Tenzin Dorje
himself may have discovered this information and added it to the text that he provided to Aris, and later
published in his own work.
One possible conclusion from the above analysis is that there have existed two "recensions" of the rGyal
rigs, based on regional variation. Each recension, easter and western, would have emphasized lineages
found in its area. What I have called "the original Gyal rigs" may be very close to the text of the "western
recension," containing only the sketch of subsection [2.1] and the author's statement that the records of
subsection (2.2) were unavailable. Both subsections deal with the branch families in Shar Mon. The "eastern
recension" must have included the expanded version of subsection [2.2]. As more original manuscripts of
the rGyal rigs become available, especially from Mon Yul, we may understand the variation of these texts
with more certainty.
The most likely timing for a split in the manuscript traditions would have been the late 17th century,
following the carving up of Mon Yul and establishment of lines of control in these districts between an
easterly expanding Bhutan and a defensive Tibet.22 These lines of control eventually solidified as
international boundaries, with an officially Drukpa Bhutan to the west and politically Gelugpa communities
to the east. Cross-border interchange among the family branches must have become more difficult after this,
and the already tenuous ties of ancient kinship even more distant. Dorje (1984), it could be argued, would
seem to be an exception to this hypothesis, in that it is a Bhutanese text reproducing section (2.2), which
belongs to what I have called the "eastern recension." But this author, I suggest, has attempted to bridge the
disciplines of traditional and modern scholarship, and for the sake of completeness he has located a source
containing the missing bits of genealogy.21 The fact that its orthography and grammar seem slightly less
authentic than TibH in the section on Dirang may reflect a general Bhutanese unfamiliarity with the names
and dialect of that district.
The Authorship and Dating of the rGyal rigs
We now have sufficient background to examine the question of authorship and date of composition. From
the very beginning, Michael Aris never varied in asserting that the Earth-Male-Monkey year, given as the
21. Aris 1986, p. 84, fn. 121.
22. On this see Michael Aris "Notes on the history of the Mon-yul Corridor," in Proceedings of the International
Association of Tibetan Studies, Oxford: 1979, pp. 11-12.
23. Dorie is also careful to cite his sources. These are listed in section (10) as: 1) Sa skyong rgyal po'i gdung rabs 'byung
khungs gsal ba'i sgron me; 2) Khengs 'brog dkar mkho che nas rgyal rigs byung khungs gsal ba'i sgron me; and 3)
Dung bsam bde chen gling mkho che nas rgyal rigs 'byung khungs ("missing pages at the beginning and end"). The
first is nothing more than the rGyal rigs of Ngawang. The next two are otherwise unknown works on the so-called
mKho-che noble families of Khengs 'Brog-dkar (pron. Bjoka) in Zhemgang/Mongar districts and of Dungsam
Dechenling in Pemagatshel district of eastern Bhutan. Tenzin Dorje has also written still other unpublished works
on the history of eastern Bhutan. In 1996 I was briefly shown an original 144-page MS authored by him in 1988,
entitled Rje dpon khrungs rabs blo gsar byis pa dga' ba'i ma rgyan ("The Genealogies of Lord-Chiefs, being an
Ear Ornament Pleasing to those of Youthful Mind"). It seems to be based on yet another unreported history of the



Notes on the rGyal rigs of Ngawang and the Clan History
date of the rGyal rigs by its author Ngawang, was to be taken as 1728. This date is found in what we have
called section (7), the author's colophon. However, the rab-byung or cycle number of the Tibetan calendar
is not given, so that the same date could correspond to other Earth-Male-Monkey years. In fact, there is
strong internal evidence that the date of its composition was not 1728, but rather one rab-byung earlier,
namely 1668.24
Before reviewing this evidence, it is worth recalling once again the composite character of this book,
and note that each version has a slightly different title. In fact, this is yet another example of the familiar
Tibetan practice of "authoring a book by taking an existing work, adding or modifying a few sections and
reissuing it under a slightly different title, but one close enough to the original such that educated readers
would recognize it to be based upon the earlier work.25 Dorje (1984) is a book of this same type. The author's
own original contribution consists of a few additions here and there to the genealogies, the incorporation of
section (2.2) material and perhaps the nine supplements also reproduced in Aris (1979, 1986). For the rest,
the book reproduces exactly the same rGyal rigs as our other three sources, but without any clear indication
of where Ngawang's work leaves off and his own contribution begins.
This raises the possibility that what we have called "the original rGyal rigs" could be the work of
someone still earlier than the monk Ngawang. The question becomes most relevant in evaluating the
manuscript that we have called Lhasa (1988). As published in Beijing, this manuscript not only bears a
highly divergent title, 26 but its very brief and undated author's colophon [7] attributes the book to two
individuals who are only listed among the sponsors of Ngawang's work. It also lacks colophon (8]. Should
we therefore take Lhasa (1988) as a precursor to the rGyal rigs as written by Ngawang, perhaps one
generation earlier?
The probable answer, I think, is no, at least not until the condition of the manuscript reproduced as
Lhasa (1988) is more carefully described, or other editions of the Gyal rigs become available. But it is
worth looking at the evidence. Section 2 is structured identically in all four versions, including a passage
citing the historical sources on which it is based 27 One of these sources was an astrological textbook called
the bsTan rtsis gdan dus thun mong composed by a Ladakhi teacher of the Shabdrung Rinpoche named Lha-
dbang Blo-gros (1550-1633/4). We know from a Bhutanese history of the 18th century that this teacher was
working on astrological texts at Cheri monastery in Bhutan, shortly after the Shabdrung's arrival in 1616,
eastern Bhutanese nobility entitled 'Brug shar phyogs su rje dpon byung rabs blo gsar byis pa dga' ba'i ma rgyar
(cited on p. 90 of the MS). Lastly, from a recent work on the history of Zhemgang district of Bhutan, we are told
of one more unpublished history of eastern Bhutan by Dorje entitled 'Brug gi rgyal rab/s/ 'hyung khungs (see
Tenzin Rigden & Ugyen Pelgen (1999) Khengrig Namsum. A historical profile of Zhemgang Dzongkhag.
Zhemgang: Integrated Sustainable Development Programme, p. 32 fn). The relationship of all these works to cach
other and to the Gyal rigs of Ngawang is unknown
24. Aris 1978: pp. 22, 37; Aris 1979: p. 94, etc. The only supporting evidence for 1728 is a marginal notation by an
unknown, modern Tibetan commentator on the date sa pho spre lo in the colophon of TibH, f. 50a: rab byung /2/
phyi lo 1728, i.e. "12th cycle, western year 1728." It is unknown when this annotation was made possibly after the
publication of Michael's earliest discussion on the subject in 1978 (Aris 1978: p. 37)
25. A typical example of this practice is the massive History of the Chiefs of Tag-lung (Dpal stag lung ga zi'i gdung
rabs... ngo mtshar nor bu'r do shal...), written by the 28th sTag-lung hierarch Ngag-dbang-bstan-pa'i-nyi-ma (b.
1788) and cited often in professor Petech's studies. The first 20 chapters of this work turn out to be exactly identical
to the history called Chos 'hyung ngo mtshar rgya mtsho composed c. 1609 by sTag-lung rje-htsun Ngag-dbang-
rnam-rgyal (1571-1625/6). The ornamental titles sharing the word ngo-mishar are supposed to alert the reader that
the two works are interrelated
26. The editors have added angle brackets to the title without explanation of what is actually found on the original title
page, or even if there was one. The subordinate title Mon chos 'yung is also not found elsewhere. However, the
more common title Gyal rigs 'hyung khungs gsal bali sgron me is found in each chapter colophon
27. These sources are said to include the Gyal rabs gsal ba'i me long, the dPag bsam ljon pa and other authoritative
sources" (rgyal rabs khungs Idan pa) (Lhasa 1988: p. 95; Dorje 1984: pp. 16-17). Unfortunately, this passage
became corrupted in Aris (1986) to rgyal rabs khugs pa, which led him into a futile search for a text of that name



John Ardussi
and the author himself claims to have written the bsTan rtsis in that very year.2 So the original rGyal rigs
must have been written after that date. This disproves the unsupported assertion by Chab-spel Tshe-brtan
Phun-tshogs that the Earth-Monkey year of its composition was 1608.29
The key information on the date of composition comes from the passage, near the beginning of Section
2. which was accidentally omitted from the manuscript translated by Michael Aris. It reads as follows:
"According to the bsTan risis gdan dus thun mong of the scholar mKhas-grub Lha-dbang Blo-gros,
'In the Fire-Male-Dragon year Khri Ral (pa can) died, and Glang Dar-ma became king." Also,
Lha-sras g Tsang-ma came to Lho Mon [i.e. Bhutan) at that time. This is certain. Five years later,
king Glang Dar-ma was killed by Lha-lung dPal-gyi-rdo-rje. Ten years later, his sons 'Od-srungs
and Yum-brtan fought amongst themselves. Then, from the above-mentioned Fire-Male-Dragon
year until today's Earth-Male-Monkey year, a time of warfare with dBus and g Tsang, 833 years
have passed."!!
Now, while there is no complete agreement as to the dates of Khri Ral-pa-can, a well established Tibetan
tradition holds that he died in the Fire-Dragon year 836 (though others place it five years later, in the Iron-
Bird year 841). Adding 833 years after the Tibetan manner of taking the starting date as the first year) yields
the Earth-Male-Monkey year 1668 as the date when the Gyal rigs was written. This exactly matches the
date given in colophon [7] of all those versions that claim to have been written by Ngawang.
This colophon now requires a closer look. I reproduce here the version from Dorje (1984), with a few minor
corrections. The initial portion in upright type represents the entire equivalent colophon from Lhasa (1988):
(Dorje [1984]: p. 89) Kha-gling gi rgyal rigs bslab gsum sde snod (pa) 'dzin pa mkhyen pa la mi
rmongs pa'i Lha-btsun Ngag-dbang Phun-tshogs dang/ Phyi-tshang Mong-gar gyi rgyal rigs dpa'
mdzangs brtul phod che zhing khungs btsun pa'i rgyal pols brtsams/] dBang grags dang/ Phyi-
Ishang Kya-sa-mkhar gyi rgyal rigs shes bya blo gros rgyas shing smra ha stong /s]de'i ru dar la
mkhas pa'i rGyal po dang/ Phong-mi'i Yas-sde'i rgyal rigs 'phrul thabs sgyu rtsal la mkhas pa'i
chos-mdzad Klu-dkar dang/ Shar-phyogs De-rang gi rgyal po mi chos yon tan drug dang thabs
bzhi'i mnga' brnyes (p. 90) 'phrul thabs kyi 'khor lo sgyur ba'i Jo-bo A-bzang dang/ de dag rnams
kyis so so nas lhag bsam mam par dkar ba'i gsung gis hskul ba las/ shes rig sbyangs brtson gyi
yon tan dang mthong thos nyams myong rig rtsal gyi spobs pa gang yang med kyang/ gsung rigs
gyen zlog ma nus par Byar gyi bande Wa-gindra'i ming gis sngon byung gi rgyal rabs dang/ phyis
28.Lho'i chos 'byrong: f. 295. A wood block print of the bs Tan rtsis gdan dus thun mong in 61 folios carved by Lha-
dbang Blo-gros himself (f. la), along with several commentaries, has been reprinted in recent years by the Bhutan
National Library. On f. 4a of this work, we read: ... de yi lo ngo nyer gsunt pall da lia'i gnam lo me 'brug sharll
sangs rgyas mya ngan 'das pa nasıl da Ita'i mi lo yan chad dul nyi (sic) stong drug brgya don gsum das/l. "This
is his (the Shabdrung Rinpoche's] 23rd year, which is today's Fire Dragon year. In terms of human years, it is 2,663
years after the Buddha's enlightenment and death)." Since Shabdrung Ngag.dbang Nam-rgyal was born in 1594,
this Fire Dragon year must correspond to 1616.
29. Chab-spel Tshe-brtan Phun-tshogs 1988: p. 8. More specifically, he writes (my translation): "... from the 9th
century, when Lhu-sras gTsang-ma came to Mon Yul at about age 40, until the Earth-Monkey year of the 10th
Tibetan era 1608 when this history was written, more than 700 years have passed during which some 23 generations
of Lha-sras g Tsang-ma's descendants have ruled over the districts of Mon." It is hard to believe that Chab-spel was
carefully reading Lhasa (1988) when he wrote this.
30. The passage is found on f. 5b of the g Tan rtsis: me 'brug khri ral gshegs pa dang/ dar mas rgyal po byas pa tshun//.
31. Aris 1986. Addenda and Corrigenda to p. 24; Dorje 1984: p. 18; TibH 105-11a: lo'i nges pa ni mkhas grub tha
dbang blo gros kyi bstantsis gdan dus thun mong las/ nte pho 'brug la khri ral gshegs pa dang/ glang dar mas
rgyal po mdsad pas tshun gsung padang/lha sras gisang na yung der dus la lho mon la phebs panges pa yin pas
de nas lo Inga la rgyal po glang dar ma lha lung dpal gyi rdo rjes bkrongs pa yin/ de nas lo ben la sras 'od srungs
dang yum brtan gnvis 'khrugs pu yin//gong gi me pho 'brug lo nas da Ita'i dbus gtsang 'khrugs pa'i sa pho spre'u
lo yan chad la lo grangs brgya phrug brgyad dang Sun CH gsum song/ Part of this passage is corrupted in Lhasa
(1988): p. 95.



Notes on the rGyal rigs of Ngawang and the Clan History
byung gi yig cha 'thor bu rnams so so nas bsdus shing/rgan rabs kyi gtam rgyun gvi khungs legs
par dpvad cing gcig tu bsdus pa 'di ni phur bu zhes pa sa pho spre loi hor zla brgyad pa'i var Ishes
bzang po la/ gza' dang skar ma' shyor ba phun sum shogs shing lang tsho dpal gyi nyi mas gang
ba'i nyin/ rgya bod kwi 'dun sa bkra shis sgang gi pho brang gzhal yas khang gi zur khang du zin
bris su bkod pa las/ thog mar yi ge'i lam du spel ba po sNga- shang bra-shis-sding-khar gw
rJe rigs chos-mdgad Nor-bu Dar-rgyas kyis bris pa dge legs phyogs dus gnas skabs thams cad du
dar zhing rgyas la yun ring du gnas par gyur cig/l.
Thus, Ngawang lists five royal figures of the eastern clans as the chief inspirers of his work, men whom he
personally knew from areas in both Bhutan and the Tibetan Mon Yul areas of West Kameng. Since this has
already been translated by Aris we need only look at the wavy underlined portion representing the
colophon of Lhasa (1988):
"Written by Lha-btsun Ngag-dbang Phun-tshogs of the royal family of Kha-gling, upholder of the
teachings and unimpaired as to knowledge, and by the king of the royal family of Phyi-tshang
Mong-gar, who is heroic, brave and of ancient nobility."
The question is whether this short colophon is the original one belonging to a precursor of Ngawang's work,
or rather, as I think more likely, an artificially truncated version of the longer colophon in the process
deleting the Mong-gar king's name dBang-grags), to which someone has added the final verb brtsams, i.e.
"written" and an instrumental - to the name of its agent. Such a truncation could have easily occurred
following the loss of the final page in the manuscript. Unfortunately, the editors of Lhasa (1988) provide
insufficient information on the condition of their manuscript. The fact that they apparently had to reconstruct
the book title makes us suspect that that page, also, may have been missing. Moreover, no authors of such a
work would have honored themselves with such praiseful epithets. However, to my mind, the best evidence
that it was Ngawang who wrote "the original Gyal rigs" is the manner in which the date sa pho spre'i lo
has been worked convincingly into both colophon (7) of the fuller version and chapter two of the main work.
The Position of the rGyal rigs in Bhutanese and Tibetan History
Although we have little more information on the chiefs who sponsored the rGyal rigs, we certainly know
their reasons for doing so. Michael Aris touched on this question elsewhere, but his explanation has far more
relevance in the context of 1668 than of 1728.
The local kings and noble chiefs of eastern Bhutan had been forced a mere decade earlier into
submission to the rule of the Shabdrung Rinpoche, founder of the modern state. He formed the nucleus of
his government in western Bhutan in 1625/26, as a Drukpa sectarian establishment espousing the Tibetan
Buddhist concept of governance called chos srid zung 'brel, "the unity of religion and the civil state." This
theory paid no heed to the secular principles of sacral kingship and clan nobility revered by the rGval rigs
and its sponsors. In 1667, as the dust of their lost battle with the west was still settling, their conqueror in
that campaign was himself enthroned as the civil head of state in Bhutan. The 3rd De-srid, Mi-'gyur brTan-
pa (r. 1667-1680), pushed the borders of the emerging state to the limits of what is now eastern Bhutan,
32. Aris 1986: p. 67.
33. Aris 1979, pp. 94 f. "By 1728 sufficient time had elapsed since the takeover of east Bhutan for the ancient ruling
clans to realize that they had lost the traditional bases of their authority." "Thus the Gyal rigs was occasioned by
sentiments of preservation in the face of a collapsing clan organization." But surely, these realizations and
sentiments would have been most keenly felt during the early years after the defeated chieftains' submission, when
the loss was still fresh in their minds. By 1728, all of the original players in these events would have been dead.
34. These struggles were the subject of a second work by monk Ngawang, the so-called Lorgyus gal ba'i me long also
edited and translated in Aris 1986: pp. 88-120.
35. See Ardussi (forthcoming). "Formation of the State of Bhutan ('Bruggzwg) in the 17th century and its Tibetan
antecedents,"contained in Christoph Cüppers, ed. Papers from the Lumbini conference on the relationship between
religion and state in traditional Tibet, March 4-9. 2000).



10
John Ardussi
driving out the Gelugpa lama of Merak and his followers who turned for protection to Lhasa. This resulted
in a series of Tibetan invasions during the years 1675-1678, actively supported by Mon-pa followers of the
Gelugpa and by several of the uprooted chieftains of central and eastern Bhutan. But Bhutan successfully
defended its territories, and an uneasy treaty with Tibet was negotiated in 1679, after which the Lhasa
government formally annexed what was left of Mon Yul and regularized its administration. To guard this
new frontier the 5th Dalai Lama founded Tawang monastery near mTsho-sna, in 1681, and installed the
displaced Merak lama Blo-gros Gya-mtsho as abbot and principal administrator of Mon Yul.37
It is therefore not surprising that, in the midst of this turmoil, poem [0] which opens the Gyal rigs
laments the defeat and degraded state of the ancient, proud eastern peoples, which the author attributes to "a
loss of the distinctions between high born and low, a mixing up of the clans, and people's general apathy
when lectured about their ancient ancestry." The average Easterner, it seems, no longer cared about the
legends of his royal ancestors with the same passion as expressed by Ngawang and the ruling elite. In such
sad circumstances, Ngawang hoped, "a future king might yet arise from among the high born clans"
"appointed by the heavens to rule powerfully on earth, like a star shining in the daytime." But "this [book)
is a secret little song," he concluded, "a story I tell carefully only to men of nobility, on whose faces it might
raise a smile, not one that I dare to repeat for the ears of all."
Indeed, the Gyal rigs would not have been favorably received by Mi-'gyur br Tan-pa and his Drukpa
generals. It was definitely a work of protest, as Aris once suggested, even if the blame for their defeat was
mostly attributable to the Easterners' own disunity and failure to sustain the clan institutions of their
forebears. Aware of this, Ngawang wrote the rGyal rigs to simultaneously document and pay tribute to their
royal tradition and to a way of life already in decline and destined to irrelevance. What was rising in their
place were rival governments in Punakha and Lhasa, driven by competing sectarian visions that would
forever divide the eastern people, descendants of g Tsang-ma, into citizens of Bhutan and those of Mon Yul.
Bibliography
Ardussi, John (forthcoming), A Historical Study of Bhutan from Earliest Times to 1763,
Aris, Michael (1978), "Some Considerations on the Early History of Bhutan," in Martin Brauen and Per
Kvaerne, eds. (1978), Tibetan Studies - Presented at the Seminar of Young Tibetologists, Zurich, June
26-July 1, 1977. Zurich: Völkerkundemuseum der Universität Zürich, pp. 5-38
Aris, Michael (1979), Bhutan - The Early History of a Himalayan Kingdom. Warminster: Aris & Phillips.
36. Du ku lali gos bzang: vol. 1: ff. 238b, 243a; vol. 2: ff. 366-38b. The timing of the last visit was only months before
the Tibetan invasions of Bhutan were launched.
37. Mon Yul was officially incorporated as a political district by the Tibetan government in 1681, merging the smaller
districts of Shar Nyi-ma tsho gsum, Dwags-pa, Legs-po. Sha-lug, La-log, and sPang-chen. It was divided into 32
settlement blocks called tsho and Iding. Mon Yul came to be governed by a committee of four officials (two of them
directly appointed by the Tibetan government) called the Mon-khul rta-dbang bzhi-sbrel, headquartered at Tawang
monastery (see Chab-spel Tshe-brtan Phun-tshogs, "Mon yul ni sngar nas krung go'i mnga' khongs yin pa'i lo rgyus
dpung rags": 8-9. and Lha-klu Tshe-dbang Gyal-po, "Di lir gsang ba'i yig rigs brje len byas pa der bod sa gnas
srid gzhung gis khas len byas rigs med pa": 10-12, both articles published in Padma bs Kal-bzang & Blo-bzang
Tshe-brtan 1988). See also M. Aris "Notes on the history of the Mon-yul Corridor," in Michael Aris & Aung San
Suu Kyi, eds. (1980), Tibetan Studies - In Honour of Hugh Richardson. Proceedings of the International Seminar
on Tibetan Studies, Oxford, 1979, Warminster: Aris & Phillips, p. 11-12: Aris 1989: pp. 117 ff.
38. Dorje 1984: p. 3. Aris 1986: pp. 12-14: lo rgyus bstan bcos kun la mthong thos dangi jig ren rgan rabs mkhas
pa'i ngag rgyun bzhin/l kun gyis go bde vyer mkho cung zad tsamll briod par spro yang snyigs dus skye bo mants://
wi srun gzu lum spyod pa'i shugs 'gros kisl/ ya rabs che btsun rje 'bangs mtho dman med// rigs rus 'chol bar song
ba'i dus nyid lal brgyud khung bshad kyang don med ngal ba'i rgyul on kyang ma 'ongs dus kyi skabs 'ga' rell rigs
rus ngon miho dpa' mdzangs blo gros Idan/l gnam bskos stobs kyis sa la dhang sgyur ba'ill rje rgyal brgyud pa
nyin skar hyung srid nall dgyes pa'i dzumi zhal sayan gyi dga' ston dang// ya rabs pho mnyam khrol mor gleng bay
gtam/l kun gvi mna ba'i thos rgyar mi spobs kyang// mgrin dbyangs gsang ba'i glu chung 'di Itar len/l.
39. Aris 1979: pp. 94 f.



Notes on the nGyal rigs of Ngawang and the Clan History
Aris, Michael (1986). Sources for the History of Bhutan. Wien: Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und
Buddhistische Studien Universität Wien.
Aris, Michael (1989), Hidden Treasures and Secret Lives. London and New York: Kegan Paul International.
bs Tan-'dzin Do-rje (Tenzin Dorje) (1984), Bod rje mnga' bdag khri ral pa can gyi sku mched lha sras
gtsang ma'i gdung brgyud phel rabs dang 'bangs kyi mi rabs mehed khungs lo rgyus gsal bali sgron
me. Bhutan (Thimphu?).
Chab-spel Tshe-brtan Phun-tshogs, "Mon yul ni sngar nas krung go'i mna' khongs vin pa'i lo rgyus dpang
rtags" ("Historical Evidence that Mon Yul was since Early Times an Integral part of China"), in Padma
bs Kal-bzang & Blo-bzang Tshe-brtan, eds. (1988), pp. 1-9. Also included in the author's Collected
Works or gSung rtsom phyog bsgrigs. Beijing: 1993, pp. 140-150
Du ka la'i gos bzang = Dalai Lama V Ngag-dbang Blo-bzang Gya-mtsho (1612-1682), Za hor gyi bande
ngag dhang blo bzang rgya mtsho'i 'di snang 'phrul pa'i rol rtsed rogs briod gyi ishul du bkod pa du
kü la'i gos bzang. The autobiography of the 5th Dalai Lama in 3 volumes. Block prints from the 'Bras-
spungs dGa'-Idan Pho-brang edition. Reprint by Tibetan Bonpo Monastic Community, 1979-1983.
Lho'i chos 'byung = bsTan-'dzin Chos-rgyal (1700-1767), Lho'i chos 'byung bstan pa rin po che'i 'phro
mthud 'jam mgon smon mtha' phreng bagtso bor skyabs mgon rin po che rgyal sras ngag dbang ram
rgyal gyi rnam thar kun gyi go bde gsal bar bkod pa bcas. The History of the Southlands (Bhutan)
written during 1731-1759 by the 10th Je mKhan-po. Woodblock print in 151 folios.
Martin, Dan (1997), Tibetan Histories. A Bibliography of Tibetan-Language Historical Works. London:
Serindia Publications.
Padma bs Kal-bzang & Blo-bzang Tshe-brtan, eds. (1988), Bod kyi lo rgyus rig gnas dpvad gzhi'i rgvu cha
hdams bsgrigs ("Selected Source Materials on Tibetan History and Culture"). Beijing: Mi-rigs dpe-
skrun khang.
Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho, De-srid (1653-1705), Thams cad mkhyen pa drug pa blo bzang rin chen tshangs
dbyangs rgya mtsho'i thun mong phyi'i rnam par thar pa du kū la'i 'phro 'thud rab gsal gser gvi snye
ma. Lhasa: Bod-ljongs mi-dmangs dpe skrun-khang, 1989. Biography of the 6th Dalai Lama.



REGISTERS AND ACCOUNT BOOKS
OF THE DGA'-LDAN PHO-BRANG GOVERNMENT*
Christoph Cüppers
(Lumbini)
Although some information is already available on the administration and political affairs of the Tibetan
Central Government established under the 5th Dalai Lama (and called the dGa'-Idan pho-brang
government), we still lack detailed knowledge on several aspects of over its 300 years (1642-1950) of
existence. I am referring here to the daily routines of both high and low officials and, for example, to the
internal administration of districts (rdzong) or estates (gzhis).
The regent (sde-srid) Sangs-rgyas-rgya-mtsho listed in his "Guidelines for Officials" the selection
criteria for and a general job description of particular positions. In his rules and regulations he occasionally
refers to official documents, registers, account books, receipts and other similar written material, which must
have existed in quite a huge quantity, but not many have surfaced and are available for research.
The collection of official government proclamations kept in the Bavarian State Library in Munich also
refers very often to such material, and it can be assumed that this latter played an important role within the
bureaucratic system, particularly when the officeholder was remote from the central government, as in the
case of district commissioners (rdzong-sdod, rdzong-dpon), storehouse-keepers (bkar-jug-pa) and tax-
collectors (yong-sdud-pa).
Since we do not have the documents themselves but only references to them, I would like to introduce
some of them here, as far as their contents, purpose and function can be deduced from these references. It
goes without saying that my statements are very tentative and will surely need in many instances to be
corrected once actual documents become available.
Higher officials were selected for their posts from the list of candidates called 'os-tho, which may be
rendered literally as "the list of qualified ones." Such lists seem to have been very similar to the mtshan-tho
or name lists of lay officials published by L. Petech in 1973, the so-called wood-mouse year roll (shing-byi)
corresponding to the Western date of 1924.4
In addition to the information given in this list, namely the family and personal names, the age of the
official and the date of his entrance into government service, the 5th Dalai Lama added one more category
in his 'os-tho for the post of sde-srid, and that is the qualification or knowledge of the official. The Tibetan
* It was a great honour for me to be asked to contribute to this Festschrift for E. Gene Smith. Gene constantly
provided help and his exceptional hospitality in his house in Delhi during his term there as a Field Director of the
Library of Congress still arouses fond memories. His house in Delhi, with its huge library was always an attraction
for me, and it was there that I firstly met many Tibetan and non-Tibetan colleagues and friends. Gene's Bodhisattva-
like generosity, for example in providing us free access to his library and sharing with us his deep knowledge of
Tibetan literature, influenced me very much to keep on with my Tibetan studies. Unforgettable are the days when
Ramon Prats, Leonard van der Kuijp and I went together with loads of Tibetan books from Gene's library to the
bazaar to photocopy them. It is to Gene that I dedicate this article, for which disproportionate shortness in
relation to Gene's unfailing kindness I have to apologize.
1. Much information can be gathered from the relevant work of Luciano Petech, Melvyn Goldstein, Dieter Schuh.
Zahiruddin Ahmad, Yumiko Ishihama, and Rebecca French, just to mention only a few.
2. "Blang dor ysal ba ston pa'i drang thig dvangs shel gvi me long nyer gcig pa," in Bod kyi snga rabs khrinis srul via
cha bdams bsgrigs, Lhasa: Bod-ljongs bod-yig dpe-skrun khang (Gangs can rig mdzod, 7), 1989, pp. 198-274.
3. Dzong gzhis/ sprod dpang/ bkar yong sogs kyils mtshon pa'i rtsis su gtong jog skor gyi rtsa tshig/, Munich:
Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, Cod. tibet. 24.
4. See Luciano Petech, Aristocracy and Government in Tibet, 1728-1959. Rome: IsMEO (Serie Orientale Roma,
XLV), 1973. pp. 240-249.



Registers and Account Books of the Ga'-Idan pho-brang Government
term that he used here is shes-yong (in full: shes-hya yong-thang). In later writings and editions of
administrative material the term is often replaced by the term shes-yon (in full: shes-bya dang yon-tan),
which has a similar meaning. If a post was vacant, suitable candidates were selected from a short-list, the
'os-tho bsdu-ba.
If candidates were, for example, selected for the post of district commissioner and were sent to a
district, they started by formally taking over responsibility for all parts of the district from the former
incumbent. This was done by carefully checking all inventory books (gzhung-khra) and comparing the
entries with the actual items. Included in these inventory books were all belongings of the district, such as
the buildings, fields, grazing grounds, wetlands and parks, grasslands, rivers and trees of mountains and
valleys (ri-klung), and, of course, the borders of the district. It was expected that both district commissioners,
the former and the new one, would go on an inspection tour (rdog-skor) through the whole district for
this purpose.
The next book they had to check was the census (them-deb) of the serfs (mi-ser). This book had to be
updated, and any decrease or increase in the number of persons had to be carefully marked. Related to the
census was the revenue register, the yong-deb, kept by the tax-collectors. These officials entered into the
revenue register the particular amount and weight of collected products submitted as tax payments. This
registered amount they had to hand over to the storehouse-keepers, who then reweighed the goods. An
exception was made only in cases of tax payments in hay, wood, turf or burning material, which could be
stored as delivered. The reason probably was that such material lost some weight when becoming dry.
The animals belonging to the rdzong, namely horses, mules, cattle, sheep and goats, were registered in
the cattle register (phyugs-deb). Here the complete numbers of the different species had to be mentioned
according to the following four categories:
1) What the cattle were used for during the period of the former incumbent
2) Which animals were sent to the storehouse-keeper
3) Which were sent outside (phyir-song) to another district
4) Which ones had died and the quantity of their milk products.
With regard to the deceased cattle, the phyugs-deb contained also the amount of meat and skin they yielded,
If the district commissioners had to prepare new lists or registers, both they and their clerks had to take care
not to mix up the different groups (sde-mtshan) and items.
The whole process of transferring responsibility for the administration of a district was concluded by
preparation of the conveyance document, the sprod-deb, in which any changes with regard to the former
period had to be marked with red ink (dmar-mchan). The new incumbent had also to report to the central
government any neglect of duty on the part of the former district commissioner or his staff.
One may regard the different districts as economic units that were expected to produce the various
goods needed by the central government in Lhasa. The gtong-deb ("register of things to be sent") contained
a long list of products to be produced in a district and collected by the tax-collectors and storehouse-keepers
for despatching to Lhasa. The list starts with animal products (skins and furs, wool, various kinds of meat
and milk products), and continues with minerals and seeds for preparing medicines, different qualities of
incense, arrows, writing material (including paper and ink), stone based paints and other odds and ends
needed by the central government.
In administering a district and rdzong, the district commissioner had to keep two account books, one
for income (byung-khra) and one for expenditures (song-khra). The income register listed all income, for
example, from legal cases (khrims-hyung) and the income obtained other than from tax-collection, the so-
called shugs-byung. The khrims-byung gi byung-khra should be distinguished from the khrims-'degs re'u-
mig. The latter is a scale of fines for various crimes and disputed acts, already known to us through the work
of O. Meisezahl and R. French. In many cases the red-mig are found as appendices in law (zhal-lce) texts.
The khrims-byung gi byung-khra, on the other hand, lists all real income from law cases settled by the
district commissioner. He himself had to prepare these lists under the following five columns:



Christoph Cúppers
1) The person who committed the crime
2) The crime
3) The punishment
4) The items confiscated
5) The market price of the confiscated items
The shugs-byung gi byung-khra had to be prepared similarly, with the persons, dates and items involved. It
should be said that the Sangs-rgyas rgya-mtsho in his "Guidelines for Officials" decreed that the officials
should always collect quality articles and not just any old items (such as old furniture) as fines or taxes.
The song-khra listed all expenditures of a district. The official government proclamations (rtsa-tshig)
mention the different occasions calling for the district commissioner to enter the various expenses into his
account. Besides the salaries for his regular staff and the expenses for feeding horses and mules when not
kept on the grazing grounds, and the expenses for feeding (only strong and loud-barking (skad-bzang)
watchdogs, there existed some other categories which were allowed to be entered into the accounts. An
example is that of "guest entertainment," when foreign delegations arrived in the district for official
purposes. For example, in the case of a delegation with low-ranking messengers the district commissioner
was allowed to enter the expenses for their food for a maximum of five days into his account.
It should be kept in mind that foreign delegations could carry a lam-yig (passport) for entering the
district, but rarely had a chas-yig when coming from abroad. The chas-yig usually contained the ration of
food travellers or officials on the road could claim from storehouses. It was regarded as self-evident that the
amount of food given to such delegations should be in proper proportion to the members in the delegation.
Tax-collectors when coming to the rdzong in order to settle their accounts received as a salary the same
amount of food and tea as the district commissioner. When on a tour to collect taxes in the district they were
entitled to receive some extra provisions called thug-rdor.
One interesting entry into the account was the expenses for propaganda purposes. The district
commissioner was expected to spend something for such activities in order to attract people from the border
regions to "favour our own side" (rang-phyogs-su blo-'gugs). We can only guess the exact nature of these
activities.
Another list to be prepared and kept by the district commissioner was the shopping list (nyos-tho).
Whatever was needed by the rdzong but was not available there could be bought from outside, and the
market price entered into the account. But before something was bought, the storehouse-keepers were
expected to make sure that the goods were not available in some corner of the stores.
The district commissioner could also enter into his account any expenses incurred for physicians ('tsho.
byed / em-chi) when helping an official who was staying far away from home. These expenses included all
medicine and the provisions for the doctor,
A category which was not allowed to be entered into the accounts was the amount spent to entertain
private traders (sger-khag gi tshong-pa). The short explanation was that there was no direct profit (tshur.
byung) involved for the government from this.
In this context I like to mention the bca'yig of a rdzong. In contrast to the existence of bca'-yigs in the
context of monasteries, I have never come across a bca'-yig relating to a rdzong or estate, but they are clearly
mentioned in the collection of proclamations kept in the Bavarian State Library in Munich. All information
can be extracted from it shows that this kind of bca'-yig must have regulated the daily routine in a rdzong.
It fixed the opening times of the main gate (rgyal-sgo), where presumably records were kept for the
registration of persons who entered or left the rdzong. One paragraph is devoted to the proper behaviour of
guards (gzim-chung-pa). Anything contrary to proper behaviour was not tolerated (the Tibetan expression is
mdzes-lam la grod-pa mi chog). It was regarded as lack of good manners if someone was repairing shoes or
spinning wool in public, sitting or standing at ease in front of high officials. It was also forbidden to write
5. See for example the phrase "rdzong guhis bca' yig byings dang mtshungs" in the Collection of Decrees (rDzong
gzhis/ sprod dpang/ bkar yong sogs kyi[s] mtshon pa'i rtsis su gtong 'jog skor gyi rtsa ishig/).



Registers and Account Books of the dGa'-Idan pho-brang Government
graffiti with charcoal on the walls of government buildings. Similarly, smoking inside government buildings
was forbidden due to the fire hazard.
As an example of a receipt, I here provide the text and translation of a relatively recent document that
is kept in the Library of Tibetan Works and Archives. Dharamsala, under the acquisition or catalogue no.
LTWA Document No. 346." It was issued when the government of Nepal sent a pair of elephants to Tibet as
a gift to the 14th Dalai Lama. In Heinrich Harrer's book Lost Lhasa is a photograph of one of these
elephants. This document is a good example of how the storehouse-keepers managed to include expenses
of the category "guest entertainment" in their accounts.
Description of the document
The document consists of four lines on brown paper and has a black round seal of 16 cm in diameter. The
letter in the seal looks like the Tibetan letter DZA. The year of issue is me-phag (1947).
Tibetan text of the document:
[1] gcen lung gnyer-khang nas/ (7) gong-sa skyabs-mgon chen-por gor-rgyal nas spyan-gzigs glang-
chen 'bul bzhes kyi gdan zhu
[2] sku-tshab dang / glang-brdzi bcas gad-pa ser gling du 'byor gdong zur chas thog rtsam ru'i khal bdun
dang / sha lug-khog phyed gsum / gra chap
[3 ru'i khal gsum / mar mkhar khal gnyis dang nyag bcu-bzhi/bya 'bras grangs Inga-bcu tham-pa/
glang-chen la bzhes-gsol krad-skor grangs nyi
[4] shu-rtsa-Inga bcas song 'dug-par rtsis 'gro'i dzin/me-phag zla 2 tshes la Seal
Translation:
Receipt from the storehouse of gCen-lung.
When to the Great Protector the king of Gorkha sent an elephant as a captive animal, the following
items have to be put into our account:
When the invited representative together with the mahout (glang-brdzi) reached Gad-pa ser-gling seven
ru'i-khal of roasted barley flour (rtsam-pa), two and a half goat halves of meat, three ruli-khal of split
lentils, two mkhar-khal and fourteen nyag of butter, fifty eggs (hya-'bras), and, as elephant fodder,
twenty-five pieces of bread (krad-skor) were given in addition to the extra provisions (zur-chas). The
.... day of the second month in the me-phag year.
Seal
In conclusion, the given examples seem to show that in both spheres of the Tibetan central government, the
religious and the political (chos-srid zung-'brel), administrative routines were well thought out and
controlled to a great extent by bureaucratic procedures even on the lower level. The dominant principles
applied seem to be, as I see it, common administrative rather than specifically Buddhist ones.
6. I thank Mr. Lobsang Shastri for kindly drawing my attention to this document, and the former director Mr. Gyatso
Tsering for allowing me to work with it.
7. See Heinrich Harrer, Lost Lhasa: Heinrich Harrer's Tibet. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1992. p. 162
8. I am very grateful to Mr. Grags.pa-mam-rgyal, archivist in the LTWA, who kindly helped me to decipher the skyle.
wig of this document. To Philip Pierce I owe the correction of my English and a careful drait reading



CONCEPT OF THE ĀDIBUDDHA
Lokesh Chandra
(New Delhi)
The Biblical conception of creation has conditioned the understanding of the word "ādibuddha". The
prophet Isaiah comforted Israel in exile that Jahweh is not merely the god of Israel, but the only God, the
omnipotent, who brought all things into being by a free act of creation. He created man, and a fruitful place
for his abode, heaven and earth. The god of creation says "I am Jahweh, that doeth all these things" (Isaiah
45.6.7). The New Testament represents Him as the Father who through the Son made the world (John 1.3,
Colossians 1.15-18, etc.). In the 19th century Church's doctrine of creation was based on the acceptance of
Genesis 1 as history and Protestant theologians believed that the world was miraculously created out of
nothing in six days, some six thousand years ago. This truth of revelation closed all questions. When
someone asked what God did before the world was created, St. Augustine answered, "He made a hell for the
inquisitive". Biblical monotheism, in which One God and Genesis are the foundation, was the prime
criterion of European scholarship for the comprehension of any religion in the 19th century.
At the beginning of the 19th century, when Hodgson (1828: 42) set to understand Buddhism, the first
question he put to Pandit Amritananda was, "How and when was the world created?" The Pandit answered,
"In the KV it is said that when nothing else was, sambhu was, that is self-existent (Svayambhu). As he was
before all, he is also called Adibuddha. sambhu commanded Padmapāņi to commence creation". Further on
(p. 46), in reply to "who is Buddha", he said that this is one of the names which we give to God, whom we
also call Adi-Buddha, because he was before all, and is not created, but is the creator". For the
comprehension of Hodgson, the Pandit used the term aiśvarika, "theistic", fused Hindu and Buddhist
elements, and provided his own interpretation. Ever since, Adibuddha and theistic Buddhism have been
discussed and imposed on Buddhist texts without substantive success.
Korosi (1833:21) cited the Chos hbyun of Padma dkar po which says that Cilupa came to Nalanda and
wrote on the gate, "He who does not know the Ādibuddha (mchog gi dang pohi sans rgyas) knows not the
Kālacakra". In another paper, Korosi (1838: 73) said that dharmakäya, as the primary essence of all things, is
denominated by several names, as Ādibuddha (thog mahi sans rgyas). He did not correlate .dibuddha to God.
Burnouf (1844: 581) considered Adibuddha as a new kind of Buddhism.
Waddell (1894: 126) identifies Ādibuddha with Sākyamuni in the following words of a Sūtra: "From
the very beginning (ādita eva) have I roused ... them to be fit for their Bodhisattva position". Further on (p.
130), he says that reformed sects call Adibuddha "Vajradhara", and the unreformed call him Samantabhadra.
De la Vallée Poussin (1908: 93-100) spoke of Ādibuddha as the theistic system of the Buddhism of
Nepal, and praised Hodgson for his systematic and complete account of this theistic (aiśvarika) theory. He
checked the texts on which it was supposed to rest, and saw through the fabrications of Amritananda. The
textual quotations supplied to Hodgson were rightly termed by De la Vallée Poussin as, "these mutilated
testimonies, this tradition arranged with a view to meet questions conceived in an altogether European
spirit". De la Vallée Poussin clearly stated that (i) the passages of the verse version of the KV where
Adibuddha, Svayambhu and Adinatha appear, has no parallel in the earlier prose version; (ii) the second
point made by him is that Ādibuddha and Paramādibuddha are closely connected with the Kālacakra-tantra:
(iii) Mañjuśrī is called Ādibuddha in the Nāma-sangiti (verses 55, 100); (iv) the Tantras have an Adibuddha
in Vajrasattva-Vajradhara; (v) "The Adibuddha system consists ... in superimposing on the five or six
Buddhas (Vajrasattva included) a Being who ... is nevertheless a god" (p. 100).
Eliot (1921: 3.387-388) speaks of an "Ādibuddha or primordial Buddha God, from whom all other
Buddhas are derived. It is possible that it represents a last effort of Central Asian Buddhism to contend with
Muslims, which instead of denying the bases of Mohammed's teaching tried to show that monotheism (like
everything else) could be found in Buddhism - a method of argument frequent in India... Under the



Concept of the Adibuddha
influence of the Kālacakra, the Lamas did not become theists in the sense of worshipping one supreme God,
but they identified with the Adibuddha some particular deity, varying according to the sects. Thus,
Samantabhadra ... was selected by some".
Evans-Wentz (1927: 13) rightly points out that those not initiated into the teachings regard Adibuddha
as the Supreme Deity, which is apparently erroneous.
The chapter on Adibuddha in Getty (1928: 2-3) is a repetition of Hodgson, supplemented by the
observations of Eliot.
The Encyclopaedia of Buddhism (1.213-219) has an entry on Adibuddha, wherein G P. Malalasekera
says that the concept arose as a part of the development of theistic Buddhism, which was prevalent in Nepal
and Java. But, he is emphatic: "It would be a complete misconception to consider the Adibuddha as just
another version of the God Creator" (p. 214).
Asanga categorically refutes a Primeval Buddha in the Sutrālankāra (ch. 9, Sylvain Lévi's ed., p. 48, S.
Bagchi's ed., p. 50): na ca kaścid ādibuddho 'sti vină sambhāreņa buddhatv-āyogād. The Tibetan equivalent
of Ādibuddha is Thog mahi sans rgyas.
The Nāma-sangiti of the Māyājāla-tantra was commented upon by Candragomin, a contemporary of
Candrakarti in the 7th century (Tāranātha 1869: 152). So the text of the Nāma-sangiti should belong to the
6th century. Its verse 58 has the word "paramādya", and verse 100 has ādibuddha (Raghu Vira 1960: 33,49;
Wayman 1985: 79/6.17, 93/8,24; Banarsi Lal 1994: 43-44, 70). The Tibetan for paramādya is mchog gi dan
po, adibuddha is dan pohi sans rgyas. The Amſta-kanikā commentary of Ravi-śrī-jñāna equates paramādya
with Vajrasattva (Lal 1994: 44); Vajrasattiva-rupatvāt paramūdyah) and explains ādihuddha as ekakşaņa-
pancākāra-vimšatyäkära-māyājál-abhisambodhi-laksanam sukham ădibuddha iryarthah. Vibhūticandra's
subcommentary Amrta-kanik-oddyota-nibandha (Lal 1994: 177) clarifies: sänklesikā vā rāgādayah /
vaiyavadānikah suddhi-hetavo bodhipakşādyas teşām vastuto 'satvāt / akārah praślesah / a adibuddhah /
anādibuddha ityarthah /. While paramādya is correlated to Vajrasattva, adibuddha is taken as a
philosophical concept. The translation and comments on the Chinese versions of the Nāma-sangiti (T 1187-
1190), by Shinten Sakai (EBu.1.217), have to be revised in the light of the Sanskrit original.
The Tanjur has a sādhana to Adibuddha-jñānasattva-Manjusri by Avadhutipa, translated into Tibetan by
Dharmasrimitra of India and by Lotsava Chos kyi bzan po (Cordier 2.279 no.14, Toh 2604). It is entitled
hJam dpal Ye ses sems dpah dan pohi sans rgyas zhes bya bahi sgruh thabs = Jānasattva-manjusri-
ādibuddha-nama-sadhana.
Kanyū Kabese (EBU. 1.218-219) says that the dharmakāya of the Mahāvairocana-sūtra is the
Ādibuddha, but he does not indicate the source of his speculations.
San Hyan Kamahāyānikan (SHK) is an Old Javanese text of the 10th century. Eliot (1921: 3.173) spoke
of "a primordial principle, called Advaya and apparently equivalent to the Nepalese Adibuddha". The SHK
speaks of the Adibuddha-spirit (amběk ādibuddha) of a cakravartin king who has conquered powerful
enemies and who can grant all the wishes of all beings. Such a mind is Mahamunivara-cintāmani-samādhi
(LC. 1995: 4.404-405). The word "ādibuddha" occurs only in this passage in the SHK. It occurs in another
Old Javanese text, Devaruci 5.5: ādibuddha rşi, alongside hyan buddha-tattva şi and jina rşi 4.5.
The SHK has three words: "deva višesa", "bhatāra višesa" and "mahā viseșa ". The Deva Višeşa (LC.
1995: 4.389, 367) of the Buddhists, according to the express statement of the SHK, corresponds to:
Bhatāra Paramasünya
Bhatāra Paramasiva
Bhatāra Puruşa of the disciples of Bhagavān Kapila
San Hyan Atmā of the disciples of Kanada
Bhatāra Nirguna of the Vaisnava followers.
He reveals himself as Ratnatraya and the Five Tathāgatas according to the ācāryas of Sākāra.
Bhatāra Višesa, "The Supreme Being", occurs in the Old Javanese text Vrhaspati-tattva (ed. Sudarshana
Singhal 4.14, 48.1. 49.7, 80.3). The SHK lays down that a practitioner should follow the four kinds of yoga,
the four kinds of bhāvanā, the four Noble Truths (ārya-satya), and the ten pāramitās. These constitute the



Lokesh Chandra
mahāguhya. The next plane of realisation to attain siddhi is paramaguhya, the embodiment of the Supreme
Being (Bhatära Viseșa, LC. 1995: 4.373-374). The exoteric path is mahāguhya, and the esoteric is
paramaguhya. The Bhațāra Višesa is the summum of the esoteric tantras. Paramaguhya is the visualisation
of the Supreme Buddha or Maha Višeşa (ibid. 367, 370). Deva Višesa, Bhațāra Visesa and Mahā Višeşa refer
to the highest Buddha of a particular tantric system.
The Kālacakra-tantra is entitled Paramādibuddha-oddhrta sri-kālacakra-tantrarāja (Toh. 362), in
Tibetan Mchog gi dan pohi sans rgyas las phyun ba rgyud kyi rgyal po dpal dus kyi hkhor lo zhes bya ba,
"The Kālacakra-tantrarāja extracted from the Paramadibuddha". The longer and original Kālacakra was
enunciated by Paramādibuddha: yad vyāktam daśabalena purālpatantram guhyādhipasya gaditāt
paramādibuddhāt, as stated in the Vimalaprabhā (p. 3). The Vimalaprabhā (p. 12) clarifies that
Paramădibuddha is Kālacakra (traidhātuka-vandita-caran-āravindena traidhātuk-aika-cakravartina
paramādibuddhena niranvayena śri-kālacakra-bhagavată Sucandr-adhyeșitena dvädaśa-sahasram
paramadibuddham niranvayam kalacakram tantrarāja-...). The commentary (p. 18) repeats the equation:
paramădibuddham kālacakram Again on p. 52 it is said that a great Master should preach the
Paramādibuddha (i. e. Kālacakra) and deserving disciples should hear it (evam paramádibuddham
mokşarthibhih sac-chisyaih śrotavyam sad-gurunā deśitavyam iti). Kalacakra is termed Adibuddha
(ādibuddho niranvayah kālacakro bhagavān abhidheyah, p. 13). The Lord (Kālacakra) is termed Adibuddha
(atha ādibuddho bhagavān vācyah/vācakam ādibuddham abhidhānam iti vacya-vācaka-laksanah, p. 15).
Ādibuddha and Paramādibuddha are one (ūdibuddhah paramādibuddhah, p. 17). Kālacakra was an entirely
new first principle, evolving on its own, and hence an Adibuddha. To emphasize its originality and primacy,
parama was prefixed and the new expression was paramādibuddha. Tucci's (1949: 1.236) statement that
"Ādibuddha in this sense is especially proper to the Kālacakra system, which ... issued out of a school not
unacquainted with theistic systems" assumes that Adibuddha is a theistic term. The Kālacakra was beyond
the anuttara-yoga tantras which had emanated from Vajradhara, the Ādibuddha. Hence he was his own
Ādibuddha, and being superior to them he was the Supreme Adibuddha or Param-ādibuddha. As the last
creation of the Tantric masters, the Kālacakra was the highest point (parama) of esoterism and, sui generis,
an Adibuddha, a Buddha on his own. Malalasekera (Ebu. 1.213) says, "The fundamental feature of this
doctrine is that of a primordial Buddha from whom all other Buddhas are ultimately derived". Adibuddha is
neither a doctrine, nor are "all other" Buddhas derived from it so far as the texts go.
Kabese (EBu, 1.218) says that in the Pradip-oddyotana-lika the Adibuddha is Vajradhara or Vajrasattva.
Nāgārjuna in his Astādaśa-patala-vistara-vyākhyā (Wayman 1977: 61-62) sets forth three levels of
Vajradhara:
(i) Causal (hetu) Vajradhara is Mahāvajradhara, the ādinatha
(ii) Fruitional (phala) Vajradhara is Aksobhya and other Tathāgatas.
(11) Vajradhara of Means (upāya) is of three kinds: guardian of the place, of oneself and of yoga.
Adinatha is the presiding lord, and parallel to Adibuddha.
Reference to Ādibuddha occurs in the very late metrical version of the KV. This version (LC. 999: 39
f.) says that in times yore, when there was the vast vacuum (mahāśünya), when even the five gross elements
had not come into being, emanated as pure light, adibuddha, immaculate ... self-born (svayambhu),
mahābuddha, ādinatha, maheśvara. He undertook the samādhi of the creation of the universe. From his eyes
carne forth Sun and Moon: from his forehead, Maheśvara; from his shoulders, Brahmā, and so on. He
allotted distinct duties of creation to them. There is no mention in the Chinese translation of the prose
version done by T'ien Hsi-tsai in AD 983 (K 1088, Arthur Waley MCB 1.358). In the Svayambhu-puräna
(ed. Haraprasad Sastri 1900: 56), Brahma recites a stotra to Svayambhu:
triratna-murtaye ādibauddha-rüpa svayambhuve /
A similar word is "ādivajra" in Mkhas grub rje's fundamentals of the tantras (Lessing / Wayman 1968:
31, 33, 243), where he explains that the word "ādi" (dan po) means "original" (thog ma). The meaning of



Concept of the Ādibuddha
19
"original" is that a previously awakened but not expanded (buddha-avibuddha) state becomes newly
awakened and expanded (*buddha-vibuddha).
The interpretation of Adibuddha (sans rgyas dan po) as enunciated by Tucci (1949: 1.236) is clear as
well as close to Buddhist thought. He gives three semantic contexts:
(1) Asanga (Sūtrālankāra 9, p. 77) refutes the opinion that Buddha is Buddha from the beginning,
which implies no conquest of Buddhahood.
(ii) In Vajrayāna, Adibuddha is the primeval cause. It is a principle common to all the unuttara tantras.
Adibuddha has several names according to the schools.
(iii) Adibuddha is especially proper to the Kālacakra system. "It represents a new aspect of the first
principle: the Adibuddha" (Tucci 1949: 2.371), though its experiences run parallel to those of the
Guhyasamāja.
Conclusion
Ādibuddha does not refer to a theistic God the Creator, or to a Primordial Buddha in a universal theistic
sense, but is a generic appellation applied to the Supreme (adi) Enlightened Being (buddha) of a specific
school or system. The Old Javanese compendium San Hyan Kamahāyānikan speaks of Deva Višeşa or
Bhatāra Visesa, the "Supreme Being", in various denominations. Adibuddha and these two expressions are
generic terms. As a generic term, it is applied to different Buddhas according to the schools. Thus, among
the Nyingmapas, the yab yum Samantabhadra is the Adibuddha (Dudjom Rinpoche et al. 1991: 115 f.). He
is called Ādinātha (gdod mahi mgon) in the lineage of the transmission of the Mahānispanna-yoga (rdzogs
chen, LC 1991: 1707). He is Vajrasattva among the Kadampas, and Vajradhara among the Gelukpas. The
topmost chapel of the Gyantse Kumbum has a gilded statue of Vajradhara sitting in vajrāsana on a throne,
with a vajra and bell in his hands crossed in front of his chest. The Kings of Sambhala and the masters of
Kālacakra are painted. Vajradhara is the summum of the Tantras (Ricca/Bue 1993: 31. 312-313).
Ādibuddhas are also found at the top of thangka paintings, e.g. Amitabha on the top of Padmasambhava,
Vajradhara over Bu ston, yab yum Samantabhadra over Che mchog Heruka (Rhie / Thurman 1991: 176 no.
49. 198 no. 60, 212 no. 67). Amitabha is at the top of the four-faced Vajradhätu-Vairocana in the Tibetan Art
Calendar of September 1991.
The word Buddha itself is not strictly the proper name of Sākyamuni. It is a philosophic term connoting
an Enlightened Being (from the root budh, "to be enlightened"). The hierarchy of Buddhahood may be
formulated as follows:
Bodhisattva
Buddha
Ādibuddha (e. g. Vajradhara)
Paramadibuddha = Kalacakra
The Nyingma school classified its tradition into "Nine Yānas" (theg pa dgu): three Sutric Yānas, three Outer
Tantric Yanas, and three Inner Tantric Yānas. In them the three Outer Tantric Yānas represent the cults of
Light or phototropism and the three Inner Yanas are arcane cults or erototropism. The phototropic Yanas are
manifested by Amitābha, Vairocana and Mahavairocana, while the erototropic Yanas are manifestations of
Akşobhya or Vajradhara. Vajradhara as the highest is an Adibuddha. After the climax of the evolution of
Tantrism, Kalacakra was the Paramadibuddha or Supreme Adibuddha.



20
Lokesh Chandra
Bibliography
Banarsi Lal 1994 - Banarsi Lal, Arya-Manjusri-Nama-sangiti with Amrta-kanika-lippani by Bhikṣu
Ravişrijñāna and Amrta-kanik-oddyota-nibandha of Vibhūticandra, Sarnath (Central Institute of Higher
Tibetan Studies).
Burnouf 1844 - E. Burnouf, Introduction à l'histoire du Buddhisme indien et le Lotus de la Bonne Loi, Paris.
Dudjom Rinpoche et al. 1991 - Dudjom Rinpoche, Jikdrel Yeshe Dorje, translated and edited by Gyurme
Dorje with the collaboration of Matthew Kapstein, The Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism: Its
fundamentais and history, Boston (Wisdom Publications).
EBu - Encyclopaedia of Buddhism, ed. Malalasekera, Colombo
Eliot 1921 - Charles Eliot, Hinduism and Buddhism, vols. 1-3, London (Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd.).
Evans-Wentz 1927 - W. Y. Evans-Wentz, The Tibetan Book of the Dead, Oxford University Press.
Getty 1928 - Alice Getty, The Gods of Northern Buddhism, Tokyo (reprinted by Charles E. Tuttle Co. in
1962)
Hodgson 1828 - Brian H. Hodgson, Essays on the Languages. Literature and Religion of Nepal and Tibet,
1874 (reprinted in Delhi in 1972).
Korosi 1833, 1838 - Alexander Csoma de Koros, Tibetan Studies, being a reprint of the articles contributed
to the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal and Asiatic Researches, Budapest 1984.
KV. 1999 - Lokesh Chandra, Kārandavyūha, Satapitaka Series no. 39, New Delhi (Aditya Prakashan).
LC. 1991 - Lokesh Chandra, Buddhist Iconography, Satapitaka Series no. 342, New Delhi (Aditya
Prakashan).
LC. 1993 - Lokesh Chandra, Cultural Horizons of India, Vol. 3, New Delhi (Aditya Prakashan).
LC. 1995 - Lokesh Chandra, San Hyan Kamahāyānikan, in the Cultural Horizons of India, Vol. 4: 295-434,
New Delhi (Aditya Prakashan).
Lessing / Wayman 1968 - Fedinand D. Lessing & Alex Wayman, Mkhas grub rje's Fundamentals of the
Buddhist Tantras, The Hague (Mouton).
Poussin 1908 - Louis de la Vallée Poussin, "Ādibuddha", in Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, ed. James
Hastings.
Raghu Vira 1960 - Raghu Vira, Manjusri-nāma-sangiti in Mongolian, Tibetan, Sanskrit and Chinese,
satapitaka Series 18, New Delhi (International Academy of Indian Culture).
Rhie / Thurman 1991 - Marylin M. Rhie & Robert A. F. Thurman, The Sacred Art of Tibet: Wisdom and
Compassion, London (Thames and Hudson Ltd.)
Ricca/Bue 1993 - Franco Ricca & Erberto Lo Bue, The Great Stupa of Gyantse, London (Serindia
Publications).
Taranatha 1869 - Anton Schiefner, Tāranātha's Geschichte des Buddhismus in Indien, St. Petersburg.
Thondup / Talbott 1989 - Tulku Thondup Rinpoche, ed. Harold Talbott, Buddha Mind, an anthology of
Longchen Rabjam's writings on Dzogpa Chenpo, Ithaca, N. Y.
Tucci 1949 - Giuseppe Tucci, Tibetan Painted Scrolls, Rome.
Vimalaprabha - Jagannath Upadhyaya, Vimalaprabhā, Sarnath (Institute of Higher Tibetan Learning), 1986.
Waddell 1894 (first edition) - L. Austine Waddell, The Buddhism of Tiber or Lamaism, Cambridge (reprinted
by W. Heffer & Sons Ltd. in 1958).
Wayman 1985 - Alex Wayman, Chaniting the Names of Manjusri: The Manjusri Näma-samgiti, Sanskrit and
Tibetan texts, Boston (Shambhala).



THE RGYUD-BZHI AND THEIR BASIC SOURCE
Bhagwan Dash
(Delhi)
The Amrta-hrdaya-astanga-guhyopadesa-tantra (as it was known in Sanskrit) or Bdud-rtsi snying-po yan-
lag brgyad-pa gsang-ba man-ngag gi rgyud (as it is called in Tibetan) is briefly called Rgyud-bzhi (Catur-
tantru in Sanskrit) because the text has four distinct and different parts:
1. Rtsa-rgyud (Skt. Mula-tantra; primary text). It has 6 chapters.
2. Bshad pa'i rgyud (Skt. Akhyata-tantra; explanatory text). It has 31 chapters, which are grouped into
11 gnas (Skt. sthana; sections).
3. Man-ngag rgyud (Skt. Upadesa-tantra; text of instructions). It has 92 chapters, which are grouped
into 15 skabs (Skt. prakarana; topics).
4. Phyi-ma'i rgyud (Skt. Uttara-tantra, subsidiary text). It has 25 chapters which are grouped into 4
mdo (Skt. vibhaga; divisions).
In addition, there are 2 concluding chapters. Thus, this work has 156 chapters in total.
In the sixth century B.C., during the life time of Lord Buddha, medical and such other faculties of
Taxila University used to attract students from different parts of the then Bharata-varsa and abroad. Jivaka,
the son of the King of Magadha took his medical training from this university, and because of his proficiency
in Ayurveda, he was thrice crowned as the King of physicians. It is this Jivaka who was present in the retinue
of Buddhists during the teaching of Medicine by Lord Buddha in his emanated form as Rsi Vidya-jnana. It
is this Jivaka who is the author of the Rgyud-bzhi, according to Tibetan tradition, as enshrined in the Zur
lugs or the school of Zur-mkhar Mnyam-nyid Rdo-rje, and quoted by the famous commentator of this work,
Sde-srid Sangs-rgyas-rgya-mtsho, pp. 358-359 of his Khog-'bugs (published by T. Y. Tashigong, Leh 1970).
According to Zur-mkhar, the Rgyud-bzhi was transmitted as follows:
(1) Ston-pa Sman-gyi-bla
(11) Dbus-pa Dar-grags
(Teacher Bhaisajya-guru)
(12) Rog-ston Dkon-mchog-skyabs
(2) Gsung-ba-po Drang-srong Rig-pa'i
(13) Rigs-'dus Sman-pa'i-rgyal-po
Ye-shes (Speaker Rsi Vidya-jnana)
G'yu-thog Yon-tan Mgon-po
(3) Sdud-pa-po Drang-srong Yid-las-skyes
(14) Sum-ston Ye-shes-gzungs
(Co-ordinator Rsi Manasija)
(15) 'Tsho-byed Gzhon-nu Ye-shes
(4) Tsho-byed Gzhon-nu (Kumara Jivaka) (16) G'yu-thog Mkhas-pa 'Bum-seng
(5) Dpal-mgon Klu-sgrub (Nagarjuna)
(17) Gtsang-ston Sangs-rgyas Rin-chen
(6) Dpal-Idan Dpa bo (Aryasura; Vagbhata is also (18) Mkhas-pa Don-grub Rin-chen
known by this name)
(19) Bstan-'dzin Don-drub Rgyal-mtshan
(7) Kha-che'i Pan-chen Zla-ba-mngon-par-dga'-ba (20) Brang-ti Dkon-mchog Rgyal-mtshan
(Kashmirian Pandit Candra-nandana)
(21) Brang-ti Dpal-Idan "Tsho-byed
(8) Lo-chen Bai-ro-tsa-na
(22) Dge-slong Tshal-pa Dbang-grags
(Great translator Vairocana)
(23) Mkhas-mchong Phun-tshogs Bzang-p0
(9) Mnga'-bdag Khri-srong-Ide'u-bstan
(24) Zur-mkhar Mnyam-nyid Rdo-rje
(10) Gter-ston Grwa-pa Mngon-shes
The first three in the above list are celestial beings. The first human being who is in the lineage of
transmission of the Rgyud-bzhi is Kumara Jivaka. According to this lineage of transmission, Candra-
nandana (eighth century) taught this text to Vairocana and helped the latter in its Tibetan translation.
Vairocana presented this work to the then King of Tibet Khri-srong Lde'u-btsan in the presence of the senior
G'yu-thog, among others. Since the time was not auspicious for the propagation of this health-science in
Tibet, on the advice of Guru Padmasambhava, the translated text was kept hidden (as gter ma) in one of the



Bhagwan Dash
pillars of the central hall of the upper shrine of Samye monastery near Lhasa. As predicted by the Guru, this
work was taken out of this pillar in 1038 by Grwa-pa Mngon-shes, and was widely propagated in Tibet.
In the eighth century, the scholar-physician G'yu-thog Yon-tan Mgon-po (the senior) visited India three
times. He was earlier acquainted with Vairocana's translation of the Rgyud-bzhi, and revised (translated) this
work with the help of the Ayurvedic physicians of India. His successor, the junior G'yu-thog also visited
India and its neighbouring countries for six times in the twelfth century and redacted as well as
supplemented the Rgyud-bzhi in consultation with the Ayurvedic physicians of those countries.
In the fourteenth century, there were two reputed Tibetan doctors, namely, Byang-pa and Zur-mkhar-
pa. They wrote two different commentaries. Byang-pa's commentary was called Legs-bshad Nor-bu (Skt.
Subhasita-ratna). The commentaries of these two authors were conceptually different because of which two
different schools, namely Byang-lugs and Zur-lugs took their origin. Sde-srid Sangs-rgyas Rgya-mtsho
(1653-1705), the Regent of the Fifth Dalai Lama, who was acquainted with these two schools of thought,
wrote several works on Tibetan medicine, among others. His commentary on the Rgyud-bzhi, called Bai-du-
rya sNgon-po (Skt. Nila-vaidurya, "Blue Lapis lazuli"), is the most exhaustive, authentic and popular among
the Tibetan physicians. He often quoted texts and views of Indian Ayurvedic authors in order to justify his
method of interpretation of this text. The theoretical concepts and practical applications of the Indo-Tibetan
medicine have been painted by him in the form of thangkas.
It will be seen from the above, that Jivaka, the original author of this work, and Candranadana, the
scholar-physician who taught this text to Vairocana and helped him to translate it into Tibetan, both were
Ayurvedic scholars proficient in Sanskrit. The two G'yu-thog Yon-tan Mgon-po, Senior and Junior, enriched
and revised it during their several visits to India, with the help of Indian Ayurvedic physicians. Therefore, it
is no wonder that the entire Rgyud-bzhi and its several commentaries (as mentioned above) are based upon
the fundamental concepts of the Ayurveda, like tri-dosa, sapta-dhatu, tri-mala, panca-mahabhuta, rasa,
guna, virya, vipaka, and prakrti. It describes the use of medicinal plants which grow in India and not
exclusively in Tibet or its neighbouring countries.
There is no mention of his authorship in the text because he is not the original author of this work, and
he composed it according to the instructions of the emanations of Lord Buddha. As in the case of the
Ayurveda, this implies a celestial origin of the text. Similarly, the authorship of many other Ayurvedic works
is not mentioned in the text. For example, the author's name of the Rasarnava-tantra, which is composed in
the form of a dialogue between Siva and Parvati, is not given in the text.
The eternal and cordial relationship between India and Tibet has few equals in the history of mankind.
Though politically different, geographically separate and ethnologically dissimilar, people of these two
lands hold each other with the highest esteem. The term "Tibet" is derived from the Sanskrit "Trivistapa,"
synonym of "heaven," the abode of spiritual happiness, where people aspire to go not only after death but
during their lifetime. Lake Manasarovara and Mount Kailasa, which are in Tibet, are the most sacred places
for Indians, as these are considered to be the abodes of Lord Siva and his consort, Parvati, the creators and
protectors of the universe.
Tibetans hold India (Bharata-varsa) in equally high esteem, if not more. The Tibetan term for India
(Bharata-varsa) is Rgya-gar, where rgya stands for a "vast (country)" and gar for dkar-po, literally meaning
"white," which has an allusion to saltva-guna, the abode of all virtues, including purity, compassion, non-
violence, sacrifice, wisdom, tolerance, and eternal happiness. Tibetans were closer to other neighbours
geographically, politically, culturally and ethnologically; and the Tibetan language belongs to the Tibeto-
Burmese group. Yet, in spite of all these, Tibetans preferred to base their script on one of the Indian scripts
that are entirely different from those of their neighbours. It was not adopted through private channels but
officially, for which a high-power delegation, headed by the scholar-minister Thon-mi Sambhota, was
deputed during the seventh century. Exchange of scholars between Tibet and India - in different fields like
religion, philosophy, medicine, astrology and arts - continued throughout the history except during the cruel
foreign invasions.



The Rgyud-bzhi and Their Basic Source
It is because of the strenuous efforts of these scholars, twenty two Ayurvedic works, among thousands
on other fields, were translated into Tibetan language and included in their canonical scriptures. The most
popular and commonly used non-canonical text on medicine briefly called Rgyud-bzhi (Skt. Catur-tantra:
Four-fold treatise) is the product of the magnificent efforts of these scholars. As the internal evidence shows,
this work was originally composed in Sanskrit, in India, and its original title is Amrta-hrdaya-astanga
(anga-asta)-guhyopadesa-tantra. This was translated into Tibetan later, and the Tibetan title for this
translated text was coined as Bdud-rtsi (Skt. amrta) snying-po (Skt. hrdaya) yan-lag brgyad-pa (Skt.
astanga) gsang-ba (Skt. guhya) man-ngag (Skt. upadesa) gi (Skt. sya) rgyud (Skt. tantra),
The Ayurveda is not an exclusively Hindu system of medicine. Because Sanskrit, in the past, was used
for writing many non-Hindu scriptures, so also the Ayurveda was patronized by many non-Hindu scholar-
physicians. Many Jain saints composed well-reputed works on the Ayurveda, although in therapeutics they
excluded the use of animal products, and even honey. In several Islamic countries, the Ayurvedic works were
translated and used in practice. Many Buddhist scholars composed works on the Ayurveda. Vagbhata, the
author of the Astanga-hrdaya and the Astanga-sangraha, was himself a Buddhist, as it is evident from his
invocation, etc., in these works, and these books are commonly used even today by Ayurvedic physicians of
India. Many works on Rasa-sastra (iatrochemistry) were composed by Buddhist saints who are held in high
esteem even today by the Ayurvedic physicians of India. Many Sanskrit works on medicine composed by
Buddhists and non-Buddhists were translated into Tibetan and incorporated into the Tibetan Bstan 'gyur.
Similarly, the Rgyud-bzhi, in its translated form, is popular in Tibet, Mongolia and Buriatia. This is in
conformity with this secular outlook of the Ayurveda. Though composed by a Buddhist, a direct disciple of
Lord Buddha, on the basis of the teachings of Buddha's emanations, and though translated and redacted by
Buddhist scholars, its non-inclusion in Buddhist scriptures as a canonical work is a matter for research.
Like many other Ayurvedic texts, the original Sanskrit text of the Rgvud-bzhi is no more extant in
Sanskrit. Even the popular Ayurvedic text called Caraka-samhita, which is a redaction of the Agnivesa-
samhita, is not available in its entirety, and was later supplemented by the less known scholar Drdhabala, in
the third century.
Unlike different other systems of medicine, the Ayurveda - the "Science of life" - has a long history,
and Bharat-varsa (not confined to the present political India) was a vast country. Therefore, what to speak
of classical works of the Ayurveda even several recensions of the Vedas are no more extant because of
historical and temporal vicissitudes. That however does not mean that these scriptures and classical works
including the original Sanskrit text of the Rgyud-bzhi were non-existent.
Pulse examination (nadi-pariksa), with which an Ayurvedic physician is identified, was described even
in the Caraka-samhita, and reference from this was extracted in brief by Todaramalla in the Ayurveda-
saukhya of Todarananda (see Bhagwan Dash and Lalitesh Kashyap, Basic Principles of Ayurveda. Based on
Ayurveda Saukhyam of Todarananda, New Delhi: Concept, 1980, pp. 489-491).
Description of the properties of new drugs, ingredients of food and recipes in the Rgyud-bzhi is in
conformity with the tradition of the Ayurveda Ayurvedic texts of different regions have added several new
drugs available in their locality and different recipes are preferably used by the physicians in different
regions of the country. The materia medica of the Ayurveda was periodically enriched with the inclusion of
several exotic drugs. Metals, minerals, gems and costly stones, scarcely mentioned in Ayurvedic classics
were subsequently added and are popularly used even today for the treatment of obstinate an otherwise
incurable diseases. During different periods of history, new recipes out of the experience of physicians were
included in Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia. Such new drugs, recipes and ingredients of food were included in the
Rgyud-bzhi and their properties were described on the basis of the fundamental principles of the Ayurveda
according to recognized tradition.
Several new diseases like phiranga (syphilis), not known in Bharata-varsa earlier, appeared because of
foreign contacts, etc. Their etiology, pathogenesis, signs, symptoms and treatment were described in
Ayurvedic texts on the basis of the fundamental principles of the Ayurveda. Similarly, many diseases not



Bhagwan Dash
mentioned in the earlier Ayurvedic texts but found in Tibet because of geographical conditions, etc., were
included in the Rgvud-bzhi and explained according to the basic principles of the Ayurveda.
There are eight specialized branches common to the Ayurveda and the Tibetan medicine, as enshrined
in the Rgyud-bzhi. Depending upon the specific requirements, the Ayurvedic texts have described these eight
branches in different order, a new specialized branch having been introduced in the place of the classical
one. For example, Narahari Pandita (seventeenth century), in his Raja-nighantu, mentioned the "Dravya-
guna" (materia medica) as one of the specialized branches of the Ayurveda, in the place of "Salakya-tantra"
(treatment of the diseases of eye, ear, nose and throat). It is, therefore, quite in conformity with the Ayurvedic
tradition that in the Rgyud-bzhi, the "Mo-nad" (treatment of maternal diseases) has been taken as a
specialized branch in the place of the "Salakya-tantra". This is indicative of the progressive outlook of the
Ayurveda as followed in the Rgyud-bzhi.
This encyclopaedic work, deals with the eight yan-lag or anga (specialized branches) as follows:
(a) Las or Kayacikisa (the specialized branch dealing with the treatment of internal diseases) is
described in 70 chapters (nos. 1-70 in the Man-ngag Rgyud).
(b) Byis or Bala-tantra (the specialized branch dealing with paediatrics) is described in 3 chapters
(nos, 71-73).
(c) Mo-nad or Matr-roga (the specialized branch dealing with maternal diseases) is described in 3
chapters (nos. 74-76).
(d) Dug or Visa or Agada-tantra (the specialized branch dealing with poisons) is described in 3 chapters
(nos. 87-89).
(e) Gdon or Bhuta-vidya (the specialized branch dealing with diseases caused by the seizures of evil
spirits) in 5 chapters (nos. 77-81).
(f) Rma or Salya-tantra (the specialized branch dealing with surgery) is described in 5 chapters
(nos. 82-86).
(g) Bcud-len or Rasayana-tantra (the specialized branch dealing with rejuvenation therapy) is
described in 1 chapter (no. 90).
(h) Ro-tsa or Vajikarana-tantra (the specialized branch dealing with aphrodisiacs) is described in 2
chapters (nos. 91-92).
The unique feature of the Rgyud-bzhi is the systematic arrangement of all the Ayurvedic topics. All the
concepts concerning health, ill-health and therapeutics are presented in the form of a tree having three roots,
nine trunks, forty seven branches and 224 leaves including two flowers and three fruits.
On an invitation, I had the opportunity to attend the International Academic Conference on Tibetan
Medicine held at Lhasa in July 2000. After the conference I visited Samye monastery for an on-the-spot
study. In the monastery I saw the cave-like structure where Vairocana stayed at present there is a statue of
the saint-scholar) and gave a final touch to his translation of the Rgyud-bzhi, among others. I also collected
the historical facts regarding his staying in reclusion from the Lamas of the monastery. I had the opportunity
to meet the Head Lama of Samye, who informed me of having seen the original Sanskrit text of the Rgyud-
bzhi, i.e the Amrta-hrdaya-asranga-guhyopadesa-tantra. Even though many original Sanskrit texts which
were translated into Tibetan are still preserved there, he was not sure of the fate of Tivaka's work, because
many of these original works were destroyed in fire. He wished me to prepare a catalogue of the existing
Sanskrit texts which have survived, and offered me all facilities to do it. Unfortunately, I had to return to
India next morning and could not avail myself of the facilities he offered to me. For this, I am awaiting the
next opportunity.
The Ayurveda and the Ayurvedic physicians of India will ever remain grateful to Tibet and the Tibetan
physicians who preserved this monumental and encyclopaedic work of the Ayurveda and expanded it with
many details on the fundamental principles, embryology, anatomy, methods of examining a patient, and
therapeutics.



A FORGOTTEN INCARNATION LINEAGE:
THE YOL-MO-BA SPRUL-SKUS
(16TH TO 18TH CENTURIES)
Franz-Karl Ehrhard
(Lumbini)
One of the most fascinating subjects for someone dealing with Tibetan Buddhism is doubtless the
phenomenon of conscious rebirth and the existence of so-called "lines of rebirth" (skyes rabs), which may
endow a spiritual teacher with a high degree of religious and political power. As studies already exist on this
topic,' I should like in the following merely to present a further case study of this phenomenon, one that is
interesting for several reasons. What I am most concerned about is, first, to demonstrate the process whereby
the lineage is constituted as the sequence of its individual representatives and, secondly, to give a summary
account of the religious activities of the various members of the lineage in different periods of Tibet's
political history. We shall be able in the process to observe not only how an incarnational chain is constituted
but also how it later fell into oblivion in the region of its origin.
1. sNgags-'chang Sakya bzang-po (15th/16th cent.)
The name of the incarnational lineage, "Rebirth from Yol-mo" (yol mo ba sprul sku), calls first of all for a
more exact definition of the geographical name Yol-mo. The latter denotes a region on the Tibet-Nepal
border known presently as Helambu. Tibetan authors regarded this region - lying north-east of Kathmandu
along the upper reaches of the Melemchi Khola and the Yangri Khola - as a part of Nepal, as the expression
"Yol-mo (which is) enclosed by glaciers (in) Nepal" (bal yul gyi yol mo gangsra) shows. The attractions
1. Some useful remarks on the concepts of hierophany and hierocracy - i.e. the spiritual and temporal aspects of a
single line of sprul sku type rebirth - are provided by D. Seyfort Ruegg, "A Karma Ka' brgyud work on the
lineages and traditions of the Indo-Tibetan dBu ma (Madhyamaka)", in Gherardo Gnoli and Luciano Lanciotti, eds.,
Orientalia Iosephi Tucci Memoriae Dicata, Rome: ISMEO (Serie Orientale Roma, LVI, 3), 1988, pp. 1249-1251;
they refer mainly to the Karma-pa branch of the bka-brgyud-pa school. Compare K.-H. Everding. Die
Präexistenzen der ICang skya Qutugtus. Untersuchungen zur Konstruktion und historischen Entwicklung einer
tamaistischen Existenzlinie, Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz (Asiatische Forschungen, 104), 1988. pp. 182-186, on
the historical development of Lamaist lines of birth, as well as pp. 208-209, where some general knowledge
concerning the constituting principles of recognized rebirth are presented. See also the remarks by Pieter Schwieger,
Die ersten dGe-lugs-pa Hierarchen von Brag-g-yab (1572-1692), Bonn: VGH Wissenschaftsverlag (Monumenta
Tibetica Historica, 2-3), 1989, pp. 14-15, who stresses the importance of "rebirth-chains" for the social status of
Tibetan religious personages. The case examples of the last two studies are lines of rebirth of the 17th and 18th
centuries from East Tibet and come from the Ge-lugs-pa school. The text Bod dang bar khanis rgya sog bcas kyi
bla sprul rnamis kyi 'phreng deb gzhung in Bod kyi gal che'i lo rgyus dang yig cha bsdams bsgrigs, Lhasa: Bod-
ljongs bod-yig dpe-skrun khang (Gangs can rig mdzod, 16), 1991, pp. 281-369, contains the hitherto most
comprehensive list of lines of rebirth. It was compiled in the years between 1814 and 1820 and documents the
practice of the Manchu administration to formalize the recognition of an incarnation by the use of lots; this method
became famous under the name "testing in the golden urn" (gser bum du brtags pa).
2. For this description see g Tsang-smyon Heruka (1452-1507), rNal 'byor gwi dbang phyug chen po mi la ras pali
mam mgur, Hsining: m Tsho-sngon mi-rigs dpe-skrun khang, 1989, p. 122.11; it is part of a list of sacred places
where Mi-la ras-pa (1028-1111), under the instructions of his teacher Mar-pa (1012-1097), was said to have applied
himself to spiritual practices. This list found its way into various "inventories" (dkar chag/s)) and "descriptions of
sacred sites" (gras yig); see the translation of the relevant passage in T. Huber, "A Guide to the La-Phyi Mandala:
History, Landscape and Ritual in South-Western Tibet", in A. W. Macdonald, ed., Mandala and Landscape. New
Delhi: D. K. Printing World (Emerging Perceptions in Buddhist Studies, 6), 1997, p. 252: "Because Mount dPal-
dar (sic) of Mang-yul and the Snowy Enclave of Yol-mo in Nepal are the places prophesied in the Avatarsakastra,



Franz-Karl Ehrhard
of the surroundings, which lent themselves to the practices of Tibetan yogins and hermits, are impressively
portrayed in the songs of Mi-la ras-pa. Yol-mo is a land of blooming mountain flowers where trees dance in
the woods, and a playground for monkeys, birds and bees. Rain falls both in the summer and winter; fog
banks come together in spring and autumn alike, indistinguishably.
The first founding of a monastery in Yol-mo is made by local historiography to coincide with the arrival
of sNgags-'chang ſakya bzang-po, a "treasure-discoverer" (gter ston) of the rNying-ma-pa school. As
written documents concerning this founding, which occurred at the beginning of the 16th century, are
available, I here cite from a translation of one of them:
The man's rigs [here "family lineage") is given as Shakya bzang-po, and his rus [here *caste") as
drangs-srong (Skt. bāhmin), he being an emanation of chos-glon padma dgun-tshan. He is told to
build a gompa in a land where the sky looks like the wheel of worldly existence (srid-pa'i 'khor-
lo), and the land like the eight-petalled lotus. After receiving this prophecy, he comes by way of
Ribu Pomba [Kyirong] to Kathmandu, where he repairs two stūpas, and then he opens the "outer,
inner and secret" doors of Yolmo Gangra."
The striking thing in this description of sNgags-'chang Sākya bzang-po's arrival is the fact that Yol-mo gangs-
ra is here described as a "hidden land" (sbas yul). Both the characterization of an idealized and spiritualized
landscape - the sky is like a bhāvacakra with eight spokes, the earth like an eight-leafed lotus - and the
"opening of the gate [of the sacred sitel" (gnas sgo) follow the conventional lines of texts dealing with the
phenomenon of hidden lands. If the tradition of this genre is drawn on, then Yol-mo gangs-ra is found in a
list of seven sbas-yul; in this context the paradisiacal site bears the name "Lotus Grove" (padma'i tshal).
Besides his opening of the hidden land Lotus Grove (and the founding of the first monastery in Yol-
mo), sNgags-'chang Sākya bzang-po is credited with the renovation of two stūpas" (mchod rten rnam gnyis)
meditate there." Concerning Mi-la ras-pa's stay in Yol-mo compare the text of gTsang-smyon Heruka, pp. 254.10-
264.18; on the circumstances that kept him from going to Mang-yul Ri-bo dpal-'bar see ibid. pp. 228.6-246.10. In
later sources the name "La-stod Yol-mo gangs-ra" is also common, see Chos 'yung I. p. 673.24. For the term
gangs-ra as a topographical metaphor from the time of the early Tibetan kings see Guntram Hazod, "Die "Herkunft
und die Ankunft' des tibetischen Königs. Zu den Momenten einer Ideologie der Souveränität in der Legende des
'Od lde spurgyal", in Ernst Steinkellner, ed., Tibetan History and Language. Studies dedicated to Uray Géza on his
seventieth birthday, Vienna, Arbeitskreis fur Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien Universität Wien (Wiener
Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde, 26), 1991, p. 196 and passim.
3. Among the finds, the short biography of sNgags-'chang Sākya bzang-po in Chos 'byung I, pp. 529.10 ff., lays stress
on a treasure cycle called Thugs rje chen po 'khor ba dhyings sgrol. The uncovering and transmission of a find of
this name, however, is generally ascribed to Rig-'dzin Legs-Idan bdud-'joms rdo-rje, the disciple of sNgags-'chang
Śakya bzang-po; see, for example, S. G Karmay, The Great Perfection: A Philosophical and Meditative Teaching of
Tibetan Buddhism, Leiden: EJ Brill, 1988, p. 145. This cycle was commented by both the Fifth Dalai Bla-ma Ngag-
dbang Blo-bzang rgya-mtsho (1617-1682) and the Second rDo-rje brag Rig-dzin Padma 'Phrin-las (1640-1718).
4. See G. E. Clarke, "A Helambu History," Journal of the Nepal Research Centre, 4 (1980), p. 11; in his introduction he
says: "The document begins as a future prediction of Padmasambhava in response to a query of his consort as to who
will repair Bodhnath stupa if it is destroyed, and as to who will "open" Yolmo Gangra." A detailed version of this
prophecy was filmed by the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project (NGMPP): Dang po jig rten srid pa
chags tshul gyis / gyi) lo rgyud (rgyas) bzur (zur rtsam (tsam) cig zhu ba, 8 fols., reel-no. E 2669/5. This text is a
concise Buddhist cosmology that, following treatment of the world's composite structure and the religious activities
of sNgags-chang Sakya bzang po, gives a genealogy of the latter's family descendants in the region of Helambu.
5. Concerning the theme "héros fondateurs'. qui 'ouvrent la porte d'un lieu' see R. A. Stein, Le Monde en petit. Jardins
en miniature et habitations dans la pensée religieuse d'Extrême-Orient, Paris: Flammarion, 1987, p. 189. For a
description of the perfect landscape befitting a holy site see ibid. p. 196: "En haut, le ciel est une roue à huit raies.
Au milieu l'espace médian (bar-snan) est orné des huit 'signes fastes' (bkra-çis rtags-brgyad, sanskrit astamangala),
Et en bas, la Terre est un lotus à huit pétales." For background on the opening of the hidden valley Padma'i tshal
and the transfer of the necessary "introductory lists" (kha byang) from Rig-'dzin mChog-Idan mgon-po (1497-1531)
to sNgags-chang Sakya bzang-po, see F.-K. Ehrhard, "A 'Hidden Land' in the Tibetan-Nepalese Borderlands", A.



A Forgotten Incarnation Lineage: The Yol-mo-ba sPrul-skus
27
in the Kathmandu Valley. Although this appears to refer to the two stūpas of Svayambhunath and Bodhnāth
(there exists a late, corrupt tradition mentioning a renovation of Svayambhünāth), Ngags-'chang Sākya
bzang-po has remained alive in the memories of Tibetans above all as the discoverer" and restorer of the
Bodhnath stūpa. As I have already presented elsewhere material on the activities of sNgags-'chang Säkya
bzang-po at the sacred site Bya-rung kha-shor, I should now like to go briefly into the passage of the above
cited prophecy, where it is said that the treasure-discoverer is an incarnation of Chos-glon Padma dGun-
tshan (= Chos-blon Padma Gung-btsan). This ties in with the myth of the stūpa of Bodhnath and leads to the
formation of the former birth lineage of the Yol-mo-ba sPrul-skus.
The inventory of the stupa "Permission to Do What is Proper" (bva rung kha shor), brought to light in
the year 1512 by sNgags-'chang Sākya bzang-po during a renovation of bSam-yas, tells the story of the
woman keeper of geese who wheedled from the king of Nepal permission to build a big stupa, which she
then managed to do with the help of her three sons. During the consecration of the edifice the three brothers
swore an oath to get together in their next life in the land of snow, that is, Tibet, in order to introduce the
Buddhist teaching there. The three brothers were rebom as Santarakṣita, the abbot, Khri Srong-lde'u btsan,
the king, and Padmasambhava, the tantric master. Along with the main protagonists, the helper who had a
key part in the construction also swore an oath: he wished to be reborn as a "Buddhist minister" (chos blon).
In the fifth and final chapter of the inventory, it is prophesied that sNgags-chang Sakya bzang po will
be a direct reincarnation of this minister, Padma Gung-btsan, and upon him falls anew the task of raising the
stūpa to majestic proportions. With its claim to run through the man who helped construct the edifice and
through the minister Padma Gung-btsan, the lineage of the Yol-mo-ba sPrul-skus acquired its self-
legitimation; we shall see how this scheme of originally two former births was further expanded upon. First,
though, some information will be presented to provide a better understanding of sNgags-'chang Sākya
bzang po and the extent of his influence.
W. Macdonald, ed., in Mandala and Landscape. New Delhi: D. K. Printing World (Emerging Perceptions in
Buddhist Studies, 6), 1997. pp. 338-340. A list of hidden lands according to the Byang-gter tradition is contained
in sBas yul bdun gyi them byang ga'u ma, in Ma 'ongs lung bstan gsal ba'i sgron me, 1, Leh: S. W. Tashigangpa
(Smanrtsis Shesrig Spendzod, 33). 1973, pp. 545.4-548.1. It begins with (bDe-Idan) Kyid-mo lung, which is also
located in Nepal (along the upper Buri Gandhaki), while (sBas-pa) Padma'i-tshal is named as the second land.
6. On the rediscovery and renovation of the stupa by sNgags-'chang Sakya bzang-po, see F.-K. Ehrhard, The Stupa of
Bodhnath: A Preliminary Analysis of the Written Sources," Ancient Nepal: Journal of the Department of
Archaeology. 120 (1990), pp. 7-9. The background to the myth of the stupa has already been dealt with by AM
Blondeau, Annuaire de l'École Pratique des hautes Études, Ve Section, Sciences Religieuses, 41 (1982/83), pp. 123-
126; concerning the date of the text mChod rten chen po bya rung kha shor gwi lo rgyus thos pas grol bu see ibid.,
p. 126: "A en juger par les élements biographiques rassemblés sur Çākya bzan-po, "redécouvreur" en 1512 de
l'Histoire du grand stūpa Bya-rung kha-cor (texte qui aurait été découvert une première fois puis recaché par lHa-
bcun sngon-mo, contemporain de Rwa locāvā), il semble que ce soit lui qui ait fixé sur le stripa de Bodhnáth, qu'il
trouve en ruines et qu'il restaure, la légende de Bya-rung kha-cor." An early block print of this most important of
texts on the stupa of Bodhnäth, the printing of which was done in [b]Tsum, was filmed by the NGMPP under reel-
no. E 251774. 18 fols. On sNgags-chang Säkya hzang-po's association with the renovation carried out on
Svayambhūnāth by gTsang-smyon Heruka and how this association came about in a late version of the so-called
Phags pa shing kun dkar chag see F.-K. Ehrhard, "Further Renovations of Svayambhūnäth-Stūpa (from the 13th to
the 17th centuries)," Ancient Nepal: Journal of the Department of Archaeology, 123-125 (1991), p. 14. fn. 6.
7. Concerning the various traditions of the myth of Bodhnath see A. M. Blondeau (as in note 6), pp. 125-128; there it
is primarily the traditions of the grer-ma and the Ba-bzhed that are distinguished from one another. Further, there
exists a version of the Bon-po school: see Shar-rdza-ba bKra-shis rgyal-mtshan (1859-1933), Legs bshad rin po
che'i gter mdzod dpyod Idan dga' ba'i char, Beijing: Mi-rigs dpe-skrun khang, 1985, pp. 203.16 ff. A more detailed
analysis of the myth and its variants has also heen undertaken by A. M. Blondeau; see Proceedings of the
International Association of Tibetan Studies, Fagernes: 1992, pp. 31-48. Of special interest in this context is the
existence of a manuscript of the Zangs gling ma biography of Padmasambhava stored in the National Archives,
Kathmandu, which has a unique introductory chapter of the myth; it was filmed by the NGMPP under reel-no.
AT 28/2.



28
Franz-Karl Ehrhard
In the citation reproduced above concerning his person according to the local tradition of Helambu, it
is stated that his caste is that of a "Brahmin" (drang srong). What we can observe here is the process termed
by anthropologists Hinduization or Sanskritization, in which an older - Tibetan - layer of culture is covered
over by religio-political concepts of Hinduism. If the Tibetan sources from the 17th to 19th centuries are
consulted, what clearly emerges is that drang-srong is a corruption of the toponym Gram-so/Drang-so, a
region in western g Tsang where sNgags-'chang Sakya bzang po was born.
Besides in his home province, the treasure-discoverer was active at the royal court of Mang-yul Gung-
thang as teacher of the prince Kun-bzang Nyi-zla grags-pa (1540-1560); in Mustang (glo bo), where he
taught the same disciples as Glo-bo mKhan-chen bSod-nams lhun-grub (1441-1525); and finally in Byang
Ngam-ring, the political centre of the province of La-stod Byang. What in my opinion offers the best
explanation for this presence in the religious and political centres of south-western Tibet and Nepal is
sNgags-'chang Säkya bzang po's role as master and lineage-holder of the Byang-gter tradition. Among other
things, he was the teacher of the two brothers mNga -ris Pan-chen Padma dbang-rgyal (1487-1542) and
mNga'-ris Rig-'dzin Legs-Idan bDud-'joms rdo-rje (b. 1512), the latter of whom had an important part to play
within the lineage of the Northern Treasures; for this reason I shall deal briefly with one of the localities
where the transmission of the teachings occurred.
Episodes involving meetings between sNgags-'chang Śākya bzang-po and Rig-'dzin Legs-ldan bDud-
joms rdo-rje are described in various passages of the latter's biography. Among the teachings Legs-Idan
bDud-'joms rdo-rje received during the first meeting with the master we find, interestingly, a treasure work
entitled mChod rten dmar po'i gter ma, and it is said that he wanted to accompany sNgags-'chang Säkya
bzang-po in the role of an attendant during the renovation of Bya-rung kha-shor but then was unable to do
so. When finally after some years - in other words, shortly after the renovation of the Bodhnath stupa - he
undertook a journey to Nepal together with his brother, he returned to Tibet by way of Kyid-grong and met
up with sNgags-'chang Sākya bzang-po in Ri-bo dpal-'bar. There, together with the latter, he completed a
"one-year retreat" (lo mtshams).
8. See Chos 'byung II. p. 259.1, where it is said that he was born into a family of "local princes" (sde dpon) of Gram-
so rdzong in the province of La-stod IHo. In a work of the Second Do-rje brag Rig-'dzin (composed in 1680), he
is called variously Drang-so g Ter-ston Sakya bzang-po, rJe Drang-so ba, Drang-so sPrul-sku chen-po, or Drang-so
sNgags-'chang Säkya bzang-po: see rNam thar III, pp. 316.6, 348.5, 350.4, 321.5 and passim. In the biography of
the Fourth Yol-mo-ba sPrulsku is found the episode in which the later reincarnation visits the homeland of his
predecessor Ngags-'chang Säkya bzang-po; there mention is made of a lake (drang so'i mtsho mo) and the activities
of his predecessor in the region (see note 35). The region of Gram-so/Drang-80 under discussion here can be
localized on maps; it lies east of Shel-dkar and contains a fairly large lake that flows into 'Phung-chu. Compare also
the biography of Zhabs-dkar Tshogs-drug rang-grol (1781-1851), who, setting out from Shel-dkar in 1822, travelled
to Sa-skya Monastery by way of the towns of mTsho-sgo and Drang-so: see sNyigs dus 'gro ba yongs kyi skyabs
migon zhabs dkar rdo rje 'chang chen po'i ram par thar pa rgyas par bshad pa (stod cha), Hsining: m Tsho-sngon
mi-rigs dpe-skrun khang, 1982, pp. 890.17-893.11, and M. Ricard, The Life of Shabkar: The Autobiography of a
Tibetan Yogin, Albany: State University of New York Press, 1994, pp. 450-452. This was also the route taken by
the Nepalese mission to Peking in the same year; see B. H. Hodgson, Miscellaneous Essays relating to Indian
Subjects, London: Trübner & Co., 1880 (reprint: New Delhi / Madras: Asian Educational Services, 1992), vol. 2, p.
185: Dhángso.
9. Concerning his role as teacher of the Gung-thang prince see gDung rabs I, p. 137.15. For his stay in Glo-bo and for
his teaching in bDe-grol Monastery in Byang Ngam-ring see rNam thar III, pp. 316.6, 321.5 and 358.5 ff. De-grol
Monastery was the seat of Thugs-sras Nam-mkha' rgyal-mtshan (1454-1541); it is from him that the First Yol-mo-
ba sPrul-sku had received the teachings of Rig-dzin God-Idem 'phru-can (1337-1406). For biographical data on
Thugs-sras Nam-mkha' rgyal-mtshan see Chos 'byung I, p. 673.7-19.
10. For the first meeting see rNam thar III, p. 348.4-6. The pertinent passage reads: kho rang gi mnam thar lung bstan
mchod rten dmar po'i gter magsol 'debs le'u bdun sogs gsan/ rje drang so ba bal yul du mchod rten bya run kha
shor gyi zhig gsos Byon pa'i zhabs phyir 'byon bzhed kyang manus par phyir byon. What is referred to as "his fie.
Ngags-'chang Sakya bzang po's) biography (and the) prophecies "Treasure Work of the Red Stopa" is the text



A Forgotten Incarnation Lineage: The Yol-mo-ba sPrul-skus
The name Ri-bo dpal-'bar turns up again at the final meeting between master and disciple in the year
1527 at bDe-grol Monastery in Byang Ngam-ring. On this occasion Legs-Idan bDud-'joms rdo-rje took an
oath to maintain in their complete state the treasure teachings of the tradition of Ri-bo bkra-bzang and to
follow the spiritual practice of those teachings in Ri-bo dpal-"bar for ten years. Even though shortly
thereafter he freed himself from the terms of the vow in order to undertake another journey with his brother
- this time to Central Tibet - it is nevertheless clear that the place called Ri-bo dpal-'bar played a pivotal
role in the transmission of the Byang-gter teachings from sNgags-'chang Sākya bzang-po to Legs-ldan
bDud-'joms rdo-rje. This is not surprising in view of the fact that Rig-dzin God-Idem phru-can, the founder
of the tradition (he was born on the east side of the mountain Ri-bo bkra-bzang in La-stod Byang), was given
possession of the region of Ri-bo dpal-'bar by the Gung-thang king Khri-rgyal bSod-nams Ide (1371-1404),
and there he rehid a portion of his treasure works for future generations."
Ngags-'chang Sākya bzang po passed his final years in the hidden valley of Yol-mo gangs-ra, where
he died surrounded by his disciples. One of the historiographical works of the rNying-ma-pa school provides
detailed information on the prophecies that the first Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku left on this occasion concerning
the location of his rebirth. To his disciples he intimated that he would be born in the "lineage of the
incarnation of the ruler" (mnga' bdag pa'i sku brgyud). As the work further makes clear, the "family line of
the ruler" (mnga' bdag pa'i gdung rigs) refers to the descendants of treasure-discoverer Myang-ral Nyi-ma
*od-zer (1124-1192), who is regarded for his part as the incarnation of the "ruler" (mnga' bdag) Khri Srong-
Ide'u btsan. The disciples found the reincarnation of sNgags-chang Sakya bzang po, Nam-mkha' brgya-byin
by name, among the family dGa'-thang nub-ma, one of the three subgroups of the above lineage; these are
called gDan sa smra bo cog po, dGa'thang pa shar ma, dGa" thang pa nub ma. The family seat lay in the
south-eastern province of Ho-brag, and the reincarnation belonged to the fourteenth generation following
Myang-ral Nyi-ma 'od-zer.
2. Nam-mkha' brgya-byin (16th cent.)
Not much comprehensive information is available on the Second Yol-mo-ba Prul-sku Nam-mkha' brgya-
byin, but we can at least track down the names of several of his teachers and contemporaries. Thus it is stated
that the ceremony of offering a lock of hair was carried out under one dPal 'Bri-gung-pa chen-po
Ratnalaksmi, who also on the occasion gave the young reincarnation the name Nam-mkha' brgya-byin. We
can identify this teacher as the treasure-discoverer and master of the 'Bri-gung-pa school Rin-chen phun-
tshogs (1509-1557)
We learn further that the young reincarnation studied the method of teaching mantras according to the
old school for the most part under Rig-dzin Legs-ldan bDud-joms rdo-rje, and another source mentions him
as the disciple of the treasure-discoverer Zhig-po gling-pa alias Rig-'dzin Gar-gyi dbang-phyug (1524-
mChod rten chen po bya rung kha shor gyi lo rgyus thos pas grol ba mentioned in note 6. It was discovered
by sNgags-'chang Säkya bzang-po in the red stupa southwest of the main temple (dbu itse gtsug lag khang)
of bSam-yas.
11. Concerning their last meeting see rNam thar III, pp. 358 5-360.1. On the birthplace of Rig-'dzin God-Idem 'phru-
can see P. Schwieger, "Zur Rezeptionsgeschichte des gSol 'debs le'u bdun ma und des gSol 'debs bsam pa lhun grub
ma," Zentralasiatische Studien, 21, 1988 (1989), p. 33. The transfer of the property of Ri-bo dpal-'bar Monastery
to Rig-dzin God-Idem 'phru-can by Khri-rgyal bSod-nams Ide is described in g Dung rabs I. p. 119.15-16 (mang
yul ri bo dpal 'har gyi dgon gnas gzhis bcas phul): this occurred in 1389. It is stated further that the treasure-
discoverer opened at this time the gate of the hidden valley of [bDe-ldan) Kyid-mo lung and again concealed there
and in Ri-bo dpal-"bar treasure works for future recovery (rig 'dzin chen pos sbas yul skyid mo lung gi sgo phyes/
dpal 'bar dang skyid mo lung du yang gter mang du sbas). Concerning the hidden valley (bDe-ldan) Kyid mo lung
see the text cited in note 5. An inventory of the sacred mountain in the realm of the Gung-thang kings was filmed
by the NGMPP under reel-no. L 290/14: Mang yul gyi gnas chen ri bo dpal 'bar gyi dkar chag, 27 fols., according
to the colophon, this text, after being written down, was hidden in Gyang[s] Yon-po lung: concerning this site
associated with Padmasambhava see note 24.



30
Franz-Karl Ehrhard
1583). Like his predecessor, Nam-mkha' brgya-byin undertook a renovation of the Bya-rung kha-shor
stūpa in Nepal, and we find that he, too, was a spiritual preceptor at the royal court of Mang-yul Gung-thang,
The name of the ruler at the time was Khri-rgyal bSod-nams dbang-phyug Ide (1577-1627).
Unfortunately no supplementary data concerning the Second Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku's other activities are
obtainable, so that I shall now confine myself to the more exact circumstances surrounding the end of his
life and the preparations for the next incarnation. The second main figure in this context is a certain Lo-chen
mchog-gi sPrul-sku, whom Nam-mkha' brgya-byin healed of a disease by performing on him certain rituals.
At a later point in time he sent a message to the east, to Kong-po, written to this sPyan-ras-gzigs dbang Lo-
chen along with a rustproof mirror for viewing certain portents of the next incarnation.
This person is in fact the father of the Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku; his full is name Rig-'dzin "Phrin-las
dbang-phyug, himself an incarnation of a "great translator" (lo chen) with the name Ratnabhadra. As chance
would have it, we find the father again in another context, one leading us to the province of g Tsang in the
religiously and politically eventful period of the waning 16th century. There Rig-'dzin "Phrin-las dbang-
phyug is in the company of the young Jo-nang Täranātha (1575-1635), who shortly before had met the Ninth
Karma-pa dBang-phyug rdo-rje (1556-1603). Some time later Jo-nang Täranātha mentions meeting the
Second Yol-mo-ba Prul-sku in person, at which time he asked him to confer a transmission for the practice
of a special Guru Yoga. This must have taken place shortly before the death of sPrul-sku Nam-mkha
brgya-byin, since soon thereafter Jo-nang Täranātha notes the passing of the Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku along with
the arrival of the Sixth Zhwa-dmar-pa Chos-kyi dbang-phyug (1584-1630), from whom he received the
teachings of the Karma bka-brgyud-pa school. Finally, mention is made of a "testament" (zhal chems) that
the Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku composed before his death.15
The political and religious climate under which we find the next rebirth, the Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku,
living is thus heralded. The impression that the observations just made would appear to force on us, namely,
12. See Khetsun Sangpo, Biographical Dictionary of Tibet and Tibetan Buddhism, Vol. 4, Dharamsala: Library of
Tibetan Works and Archives, 1973, pp. 220-222. The source for this brief biographical sketch of the Second Yol-
mo-ba sPrul-sku is the text Rang gi rtogs pa brjod pa (see note 16). The mention of Rin-chen phun-tshogs together
with Rigs-dzin Legs-Idan bDud-'joms rdo-rje as the first teachers of the young incarnation points to the contact
between the brothers mNga'-ris Pan-chen and mNga'-ris Rig-'dzin and the treasure finder of the 'Bri-gung-pa school.
In the work of Rig-dzin Padma 'phrin-las, which reveals much concerning these connections, it is stated that the
latter three persons jointly performed initiatory rituals in bSam-yas, as a result of which happiness and contentment
prevailed in Tibet for thirteen years; see rNam thar III. p. 330.2-4 (bsam yas su rje 'bri gung pa rin chen phun tshogs
spyan drangs te mnga' ris pan di ta chen po mched gnyis dang/chos rgyal 'bri gung pa rin chen phun Ishogs te bla
ma dam pa gsum gyis rab gnas minga' gsol sogs rien 'brel mang du mdzas pas/ bod khams su lo bcu gsum gyi bar
hde skvid 'yung ba'i rten 'brel 'grig). On 's Prul-sku Nam-mkha' brgya-byin's place in the tradition surrounding
Zhig-po gling-pa see Thob yig, pp. 168-176; this latter treasure-discoveer has been known up to now primarily as
the teacher of Sog bzlog-pa Blo-gros rgyal-mtshan (1552-1624),
13. For the mention of Nam-mkha' brgya-byin at the court of the Gung-thang king see gDung rabs I, p. 143.14-15,
where he is called Yol-mo sPrul-sku Nam-mkha' brgya byin. This must have been at an quite early age of the ruler,
since Khri-rgyal bSod-nams dbang-phyug Ide relied in the latter part of his life on the Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku
bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu as his spiritual preceptor; see ibid., p. 143.17-18.
14. For a description of the contacts between the Second Yol-mo-basPrul-sku and the father of the next incarnation see
Khetsun Sangpo (as in note 12), pp. 221-22; it should be noted that this report was from the perspective of the Third
Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku. The source for the meeting between Jo-nang Tāranātha and the two protagonists is the latter's
autobiography: see Rtogs brjod I. p. 53.6-7 & p. 135.7.
15. See Rtogs brjod I. pp. 138.5, 139.7. Concerning the person of Lo-chen Ratnabhadra, it may be noted that he is a
teacher of the Jo-nang-pa school; see Ngag-dbang Blo-gros grags-pa (1920-1975), dpal Idan jo nang pa'i chos
byung rgyal ba'i chos tshul gsal byed zla balisgron me, Hsining: mTsho-sngon mi-rigs dpe-skrun khang, 1992, pp.
40.27-41.5. He founded the monastery Ri-bo gru-'dzin in the valley of gZhad, among others, and Jo-nang Kun-dga'
grol-mchog (1507-1566) was one of his disciples. He is named along with Rig-dzin Legs-Idan bDud-'joms rdo-rje
as a teacher of Byang-bdag Rigs-'dzin Chos-rgyal dbang-po'i sde (b, 1550); see Chos 'byung 1, p. 557.3. For mention
of a biography of Lo-chen mchog-gi sPrul-sku written by his son, the Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku, see note 55.



A Forgotten Incarnation Lineage: The Yol-mo-ba sPrul-skus
that the teachings of the Jo-nang-pa and Karma bka'-brgyud-pa schools had gained the upper hand in the
province of g Tsang at the end of the 16th century, should not detract from the fact that the rNying-ma-pa
school continued to make its influence felt. The tensions between these various currents were given clear
vent to in the life of the next incarnation
3. bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu / sTobs-ldan shugs-chang rtsal (1598-1644)
Concerning the life and activities of the Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku four autobiographical writings are
available, of which the "narrative" (rtogs briod), written in 1632, contains the most detailed information on
the birth and youth, education and travels as well as the spiritual practices and political activities of the
reincarnation. In the following I shall be concerned only with information providing insight into the
incarnational status of bsTan-'dzin nor-bu, his teachers and his significance for the Byang-gter tradition. It
may be hoped that the complete biography of this interesting figure from the 17th century will one day be
published. 16
Even though the birthplace of the new reincarnation lies in Kong-po, in eastern Tibet, his ties with the
province of gTsang, in Central Tibet, are substantial. Thus it is stated that the ruler of the latter province, the
sDe-srid gTsang-pa, made the son of Rig-'dzin 'Phrin-las dbang-phyug "partake of excellent provisions"
(mthun rkyen phun gsum tshogs pa gnang 'dug). The area in and around the birthplace bears the name Klu-
Inga, and from a travel report of a later author we know that it is located in the vicinity of the Bu-chu gser-
kyi lha-khang; this is one of the four m Tha'-'dul temples that go back to the time of Srong-btsan sgam-po.
A separate chapter is devoted in the account to the procedure used for determining that the boy was the
reincarnation of sPrul-sku Nam-mkha' brgya-byin; this takes us back to the first member and legitimating
figure of the Yol-mo-ba Prul-skus: the helper during the construction of the Bodhnath stūpa. Thus we find
the following statement in connection with the preceding reincarnation, when the problem of determining
the incarnational status became acute:
In the testament of the preceding (incarnation) it is stated: "If the bodily sign (of carrying) loads
during the existence as a helper is present, recognize his status, even if the child) is mute. If it is
not present, there is no need to proceed further), even if he can express himself clearly."18
16. Concerning the autobiographical writings of the Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku see Appendix /. In the following I cite
the text Rang gi rtogs pa briod pa according to the second edition. The English introduction for the two volume
edition of the writings of bs Tan- dzin nor-bu mentions the existence of a biography, this datum is confirmed in the
Fifth Dalai Bla-ma's biography of his teacher Zur Chos-dbyings rang-grol (1610-1657); see rNam thar II, fol.
1070/6 (... rig 'dzin yol mo ba'i mam thar...). For the existence of the bka''bum see note 55.
17. The ruler of g Tsang is mentioned in Rang gi rtogs pa brjod pa, p. 104.6; he was probably Karma bs Tan-bsrung
dbang-po (who ruled up to 1611). The birthplace, Klu-Inga, is referred to in the biography of Rig-dzin Tshe-dbang
-bu, who paid a visit to it; see rNam thar V, p. 190.3-4 (lha ri seng ge'i zhol guru chen po'i sgrub phug tu te
zhig bzhugs/ de'i mdun klu Inga zhes rig 'dzin yol mo ha bstan dzin nor bu skle mched sku bltams pa'i yul die
bzhugs...). The brother" (sku mched) of bs Tan-dzin nor-bu adverted to here bears the name Phyag-rdor nor-bu
(concerning whom see note 19). The cave of Padmasambhava and the birthplaces of the two brothers is mentioned
directly after the account of Rig- dzin Tshe-dbang nor-bu's sojourn in Bu-chu gser-kyi lha-khang; for the latter
temple as a source for treasure works of the rNying-ma-pa school in the 17th century see F.-K. Ehrhard, "The Role
of 'Treasure Discoverers' and Their Writings in the Search for Himalayan Sacred Lands", in Toni Huber, ed., Sacred
Spaces and Powerful Places in Tibetan Culture, Dharamsala: Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, 1999, p. 232
18. See Rang gi rtogs pa brjod pa, p. 106.2-3 (gong ma'i bka chems las/bran du skyes dus kyi sgal pa'i sha rtags pa
'di dug na Ikug par 'dug kyang bdag rkyen brgyil 'di ni dug na kha gsal yang byed mi dgos gsungs pa...) See the
paraphrase in Chos 'byung 1, p. 563.1-3: "In accordance with the words of the earlier reincarnation: "If the scar
[from carrying the loads during construction of the Bya-rung kha-shor stupa in his existence as helper to the
woman goose-keeper is present, recognize his status. When the articles of clothing were removed and the body)
exposed to eyesight, the scar (from carrying loads could be seen, and still other (methods of identifying (the
reincarnation) were employed a number of times." (... sku gong mali gsung las/ mchod rten bya rung kha shor
bzhengs dus/bya rdzi'i bran du skyes dus kyi sgal mig 'di vod na bdag rkyen gvis/gsung pa yod dug hzhin/ na bza



Franz-Karl Ehrhard
Given the presence of these visible body signs, the status of bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu as incarnation of the helper
at the construction of the Bodhnāth stūpa - and by implication also that of the minister Padma Gung-btsan
as well as the First and Second Yol-mo-ba sprul-skus - was cleared up. As can be read in two of the four
other autobiographical writings, the Third Yol-mo-ba Prul-sku was creatively caught up in the incarnational
chain he embodied, not only devoting to it a prose account furnished with pictures - bearing the title rTogs
brjod mkhas pa'i rna rgyan - but also commemorating each of the individual links of the chain with a poem
that stated the birthplace and recapitulated details of the incarnation, this work bears the title "Praise in the
Form of a Thread of the Line of Rebirths" (skyes rabs kyi 'phreng bar bstod pa).
This latter document, important for the lineage's understanding of itself and for its attempt to gain
public recognition, does not, in its presentation of the earlier incarnations, stop with the helper during the
building of the stupa and the minister Padma Gung-btsan; other figures are also added, localizing the
spiritual activities of the lineage within the real geography and the otherworldly realms compatible with the
world view of a 17th century Tibetan Buddhist. As is learned from the colophon of the text in question,
bsTan-'dzin nor-bu, when producing the rebirth sequence, let himself be guided by sPrul-sku Nam-mkha'
brgya-byin's data, so that we can get a good idea, from this example, of how the individual representatives
of the incarnational lineage went about establishing and cementing their claim to spiritual powers.
Let us now proceed with the education of the young Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku and his different teachers.
Soon after the death of his father we find him in Central Tibet, in Myang, where for the first time he met
with the Sixth Zhwa-dmar-pa Chos-kyi dbang-phyug. Under the latter he took the upăsaka vows and
received the name Karma Thub-bstan snying-po mnam-par rgyal-ba (his full ordination as a bhikṣu would
also take place later under the Sixth Zhwa-dmar-pa). In Ngam-ring, in La-stod Byang - a place familiar in
connection with the activities of the First Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku - the first person he met was Lo-chen "Gyur-
med bde-chen (1540-1615), a descendant of Thang-stong rgyal-po (1361-1485) and author of the well-
known biography of this siddha. According to the illustrations of the life of bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu (see Appendix
D), it was primarily the teachings of the Sadangayoga of the Kālacakra that he studied on a later occasion in
gCung Ri-bo-che under Lo-chen "Gyur-med bde-chen. 19
Before I take up the next teacher, the young incarnation's visit to the Kathmandu Valley must be
mentioned. This occurred sometime in the years between 1614 and 1617 at the invitation of the Malla king
Shivasimha, who ruled in Kathmandu from 1578 to 1619, and also in Patan from 1598 to 1619. bsTan-'dzin
nor-bu performed a "great public consecration" (khrom dbang chen po) in front of the king's palace, and a
dialogue carried on with the aid of an interpreter has come down to us. He visited, furthermore, the
Svayambhunath stupa and other Buddhist shrines of the Valley. A separate chapter of the autobiography
provides information on the activities at the sacred site of Bya-rung kha-shor:
phud nas/ Itas pas/ sgal mig kyang gsal bar mthong zhing/ ngos 'dzin gzhang yang mang du mdzad). For the
inspection of bodily signs as confirmation of the incarnational status of the Fourth Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku see
note 40.
19. See Rang gi rtogs pa brjod pa, pp. 112.6-114.1, concerning the upāsaka vows under the Sixth Zhwa-dmar-pa, and
ibid., pp. 114.1-116.5. concerning the meeting with Lo-chen "Gyur-med bde-chen: for a meeting with this teacher
from the perspective of Jo-nang Taranātha, see Rtogs brjod I, p. 152.2-4. Some interesting facts concerning the Ri-
bo-che Monastery are found in Chos 'byung I, p. 664.9-12: "gCung Ri-bo-che was first built by the mahasiddha
Thang-stong rgyal-po; subsequently it was maintained by a series of successors in the family line. Lo-chen "Gyur-
med bde-chen, who was one of them, offered [the monastery] to the Yol-mo gter-ston bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu; later
sGom-smyon Phyag-rdor nor-bu, the treasure-discoverer's younger brother, and the series of the incarnations of
sGom-smyon, made it their residence." (geung ri bo che ni thog mar grub chen thang stong rgyal pos brab/ de nas
dbon rgyud kyi rim par bskyangs pa las/ lo chen 'gyur med bde chen gyis yol mo gter ston bstan 'dzin nor bur phul
nas/ gter ston gcung sgom smyon phyag rdor nor bu dang/ sgom smyon sprul sku rim byon gyis gdan sa mdzad).
In the autobiography of the Fifth Dalai Bla-ma, this Phyag-rdor nor-bu is mentioned several times with the spelling
sGam-smyon sPrul-sku), and the year of his death can be determined to be 1658; see Rtogs briod II. pp. 698.19-
699.4. A text by the younger brother of the Yol-mo-ba Prul-sku was filmed by the NGMPP under reel-no. AT
82/12: Do rje phur pa'i dbang bshad thos pa don Idan, 10 fols.



A Forgotten Incarnation Lineage: The Yol-mo-ba sPrul-skus
Afterwards Mahāraja Shivasimha acted in that realm as the donor' (danapāti), [and] that temple
was built for service at [Bya-rung) kha-shor. I arrived (there) for the earth ritual.'... On the very
day on which the consecration of this large, self-manifested stūpa was renewed, a great shower of
flowers occurred.20
The young incarnation returned to the province of g Tsang via Yol-mo and Mang-yul Gung-thang, where he
stayed at the court of Khri-rgyal bSod-nams dbang-phyug Ide; soon afterwards he met the gТsang sDe-srid
Karma Phun-tshogs rnam-rgyal (ruled 1611-1621) in the fortress of bSam-grub rtse. During the following
period in Central Tibet bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu continued to be busy with his studies, which he also pursued in,
among other places, Nyin-byed gling and in the monastery Ga-Idan Byams-pa gling in Ngam-ring.
At the age of 19, that is, in 1617, the Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku came into contact with the teacher who
reacquainted him with the spiritual practices of the rNying-ma-pa school, and above all with the rituals of
the Byang-gter tradition: Rig-dzin Ngag-gi dbang-po (1580-1639), who, as the incarnation of the above-
mentioned mNga'-ris Rig-dzin Legs-ldan bDud-'joms rdo-rje, had been educated by his father, Byang-bdag
Rigs-'dzin dBang-po'i sde. We know that on a total of four occasions a wealth of treasure teachings was
passed on to bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu, among which the cycle Byang gter thugs sgrub mam gsum stands out;
according to one source, bsTan-'dzin nor-bu was named a spiritual "representative" (rgyal tshab) by Rig-
'dzin Ngag-gi dbang-po.21 That this transfer of the teachings did not proceed without its problems at the
beginning is seen in a revealing description by the Fifth Dalai Bla-ma Blo-bzang rgya-mtsho:
Only a short period having passed after the return of the precious rebirth [i.e. the Third Yol-mo-ba
sPrul-sku] from Nyin-byed gling, fear arose over the consumption (of the ingredients) of the
Ganacakra because of the [previously obtained spiritual] experience during debating, and
manifold erroneous ideas came up, [in particular) the thought that the multitude of ritual acts for
subduing worldly gods obviously only harm living beings. At this point the Mahavidyādhāra ſi.e.
Rig-'dzin Ngag-gi dbang-po) focussed his directly staring gaze upon the rebirth, and with the
words "Since there are so many cycles here in the old school of hidden mantras [for practising)
violent activity - the 'rites of submission' (abhicara) - are you not ashamed?" envy in the form of
a logician's arrogance and dismissal dissolved itself into a subdued object. By virtue of the fact
20. Rang gi rtogs pa brjod pa, p. 136.4-5 (de nas yul der si hu sing ma hā rā jas sbyin bdag mdzad/kha shor zhabs
drung gi dgon pa 'di thebs pa yin deli sa chog la phyin... rang byung gi mchod rten chen po denyis (nyid) la rab
gnas gsos pa'i nyin kyung me tog gi char chen po). See also the summary of the entire section in Chos 'byung I. pp.
563.23-564.1: "The accommodations for the caretaker were newly built next to the great stūpa Bya-rung kha-shor;
at this point he made a threatening gesture in the direction of an opening in the rock, and since he said, "If water
could come out of it," there later arose there a fresh spring. While he was carrying out the consecration at the stūpa,
a rain of flowers fell; the wishes that were made (on this occasion) were immediately fulfilled, it is said" (mchod
rten chen po bya rung kha shor 'gran gyi dkon gnyer sdod sa gsar du btab/ de'i tshe gad pa gcig la phyag mdzub
btsugs tel 'di nas chu ci byung na gsungs pas slar de nas chu mig dkar mo byung/ mchod rten la rab gnas mdzad
pas/ me tog gi char babs/smon lam debs par mdzad pa rams kyang 'phral du 'grub par byung gsungs). Some
years later the Sixth Zhwa-dmar-pa Chos-kyi dbang-phyug followed the steps of his disciple to the Kathmandu
Valley - and to Helambu - and met the next generation of Malla kings: see F-K. Ehrhard, "The Lands Are like a
Wiped Golden Basin': The Sixth Zhwa-dmar-pa's Journey to Nepal and his Travelogue (1629/30)", in Samten G
Karmay, ed., Les Habijants due toit du Monde: Erudes recueillies en homage à Alexander W. Macdonald, Nanterre:
Société d'Ethnologie (Recherches sur la Haute Asie, 12), 1997, pp. 126-132
21. See Chos 'yung II, p. 280.1-2 (vol mo ba gsum pa bstan dzin nor bu snga phyi lan bzhi'i bar du sku drung du
phebs par byang gter giso bor gyur pa'i gter chos zab mo bum pa gang bya'i tshul du rtsal (=bstsal) te nyid kyi
rgyal tshab tu mnga' gsol mdzad). Concerning the genealogy of Rig-'dzin Ngag-gi dbang-po, it may be noted that
his father numbered among the last representatives of the royal house of La-stod Byang, while his mother belonged
to the nobility of Phyong-rgyas, the "royal family of Za-hor" (za hor gyi rgyal rigs); ibid. p. 277.4. The Fifth Dalai
Bla-ma Blo-bzang rgya-mtsho also came from the latter family, the autobiography mentions the presence of Rig-
'dzin Ngag-gi dbang po shortly after the birth of Ngag-dbang Blo-bzang rgya-mtsho in the year 1617; see Rtogs
brjod II, p. 44.5-7.



Franz-Karl Ehrhard
that a trust was born from within that no longer differentiated between teacher and the teaching, a
state was reached in which he was purified into a mantradhara of the old school.22
Detailing the further activities of bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu, as a representative of the rNying-ma-pa school, would
lead us too far afield. He did, in any case, do justice to his role as lineage-holder of the Byang-gter tradition;
an exact analysis of the works of the Fifth Dalai Bla-ma, for example, might shed some light on his spiritual
and political services during a trying period for the newly established Tibetan government. We know already
at least that, long before his trip to the court of the first Manchu emperor, the young Dalai Bla-ma sought
out the advice of the Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku on that matter, and a personal meeting between Blo-bzang
rgya-mtsho and bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu is likewise documented for the year 1643.
The only thing that needs to be focussed on in the following is the importance of the Third Yol-mo-ba
sPrul-sku as a treasure-discoverer, in which capacity he visited the old haunts of the sNgags-chang Sakya
bzang-po. We find him during his first large retreat, which is devoted to the cycles of the Byang gter thugs
sgrub ram gsum, in a place frequented a century earlier by the First Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku, namely, Mang-
yul Ri-bo dpal-'bar. The name sTobs-ldan shugs-'chang rtsal was given to him by a dākini in a dream, along
with a "scroll” (shog dril). Finally, several years later, in Gyang[s] Yon-po lung in the province of g Tsang,
he brought to light "introductory lists" (kha byang) and a treasure cycle dedicated to Padmasambhava in his
outer form as rDo-rje gro-lod, being assisted in this by his teacher Rig-'dzin Ngag-gi dbang-po. In this cycle
were found prophecies that not only concerned the number of rebirths of the minister Padma Gung-btsan but
also pertained to the younger brother sPrul-sku Phyag-rdor nor-bu and the person of the Fifth Dalai Bla-ma.
These identifications were made by Rig-'dzin Ngag-gi dbang-po 24
On this occasion, too, a portion of text was recovered that again refers to Ri-bo dpal-'bar and to a
treasure that remained there to be discovered. The find, prophesied for the year 1639, did not occur in spite
of preparations that began already in 1638; the Fifth Dalai Bla-ma cites the death of Rig-'dzin Ngag-gi
22. See rNam thar I, p. 516.1-3 (sprul sku rin po che nyin byed gling nas phyir byon te ring por ma long pas/rtog ge
ha'i nyams kyis shogs 'khor gsol ba la 'tsher snang dang/ dregs 'dul gyi las tshogs la semis can la gnod pa byed pa
'ba'zhig tu 'dug dgongs pa'i log rog sna tshogs shar ba na/ rig 'dzin chen posspruil pa'i sku la spyan gcer gvi gzigs
nas/gsang sngags mying ma 'di la drag po mngon spyod kyi skor mangs bus thugs khrel yod dam gsung ha na
mtshan nyid pa'i khyad gsod dang nga rgyal gyi ham thul vul bud del bla ma dang chos la mi phyed pa'i mos pa
gting nas 'khrungs pas rnying ma ba'i sngags 'chang du gtsang sing gi song go). The passage was borrowed by
Chos 'byung 1, p. 564.13-19. The composition of the biography of Rig-dzin Ngag-gi dbang po by the Fifth Dalai
Bla-ma occurred in the year 1654; visionary meetings with Rig-dzin Legs-ldan bDud-'joms rdo-rje, who urged the
37-year-old Dalai Bla-ma to disseminate his treasure cycles, are on record as having taken place in that very year.
See Samten G Karmay, Secret Visions of the Fifth Dalai Lama: The Golden Manuscript of the Fournier Collection,
London: Serindia Publications, 1988, p. 37.
23. Concerning the Third Yol-mo-ba's reaction to the doubts of the Fifth Dalai Bla-ma as to whether he should accept
the invitation to the court of the Manchu emperor, see Samten G. Karmay, "The Gold Seal: The Fifth Dalai Lama
and Emperor Shun-chih", in The Arrow and the Spindle: Studies in History, Myths, Rituals and Beliefs in Tibet,
Kathmandu: Mandala Book Point, 1998, p. 518; the written source for this is Rtogs briod II, p. 242.6-10. A face-
to-face meeting with the Third Yol-mo-ba Prul-sku is recorded shortly before this in the autobiography of the Fifth
Dalai Bla-ma; see ibid. p. 236.3-18. Also recorded is a vision of Ngag-dbang Blo-bzang rgya-mtsho in which Rig.
'dzin Ngag-gi dbang-po was flanked by his two disciples, the Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku and Zur Chos-dbyings
rang-grol; see Karmay (as in note 22) p. 217-4 (in the résumé of the text portion - ibid. p. 67-bsTan-'dzin phrin-
las should be emended to bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu).
24. This is a brief summary of rNam thar I, pp. 542.6-545.1, reproduced in Chos 'byung I, pp. 564.19-565.18.
Gyang[s] Yon-po lung is known as a meditation grotto in the vicinity of Grom-pa Gyangis), one of the four Ru-
gnon temples from the time of Srong-btsan sgam-po. Treasure works of the cycle Le'u bdun ma had been recovered
there as early as 1362 by the hermit bZang-po grags-pa, who passed them on to Rig-'dzin God-Idem 'phru-can;
concerning this find, which contained texts intended specifically for the kings of Mang-yul Gung-thang, see
Schwieger (as in note 11), pp. 30 ff. The sojourn of the Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku in Gyang[s] Yon-po lung is
described in detail in Rang gi rtogs pa brjod pa, pp. 190.1-200.5.



A Forgotten Incarnation Lineage: The Yol-mo-ba Prul-skus
35
dbang-po as the reason for this, since it caused bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu to proceed to Central Tibet and not to the
sacred site in Mang-yul Gung-thang. During this time bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu, like the First and Second Yol-
mo-ba sPrul-skus previously, had connections with the royal court of Mang-yul Gung-thang, which was
undergoing a decline in the wake of the wars between gTsang and dBus. The following citation shows that
these links with the old royal line was very close:
The chief consort of Khri bSod-nams dbang-phyug Ide bore only a daughter but no sons. This
daughter, [called) I Ha-gcig, later became the companion of the Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku bs Tan-'dzin
nor-bu. To her (in turn) a daughter was born, with the signs of a dākini, bearing the name Nor-'dzin
dbang-mo and known as the reincarnation of Ma-cig Rwa-ma. It is said that, at the age of 25, she
entered the City of Heavenly Wanderers to the accompaniment of numerous omens.26
bsTan-'dzin nor-bu's daughter will cross our path again in connection with the Fourth Yol-mo-basPrul-sku. It
may be merely pointed out in conclusion that, according to information supplied by Kah-thog Rig-'dzin Tshe-
dbang nor-bu, the royal family of Mang-yul Gung-thang came to an end with her, an event that is intimately
connected with the break-up of another - if rather short-lived - ruling family, the lords of gTsang, As we have
seen, bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu had contacts with representatives of this family, and the name of the final ruler,
Karma bs Tan-skyong dbang-po (ruled 1621-1642), likewise occurs in several places in his autobiography.
It would take us too far afield to go into these connections between the Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku and
the ruling families of Mang-yul Gung-thang and g Tsang in detail. He had, in any case, a not inappreciable
role to play during this period of political upheaval in Tibet, which brought in its wake, by laying the
foundations for it, the primacy of the dGa-Idan Pho-brang government. We know, for instance, that the
gTsang-pa mahärāja, Karma bs Tan-skyong dbang-po, sent him to the fortress of Shel-dkar in the province
of IHa-stod IHo, where he carried out "rituals for the repulse of the Mongolian (armies)" (sog bzlog gi sku
rim). Further, his relations with the Sixth Zhwa-dmar-pa Chos-kyi dbang-phyug continued, and also with the
Tenth Karma-pa Chos-dbyings rdo-rje (1604-1674); in the company of the latter, for example, he tarried at
La-phyi Chu-dbar on the border of Nepal.?? Similarly, his contacts with representatives of the rNying-ma-pa
25. See rNam thar I, p. 545.1-5. In the biography of Zur Chos-dbyings rang-grol, written by the Fifth Dalai Bla-ma, this
thwarted treasure find is described and interpreted politically, see rNam thar II, p. 125-4-6. There is a late echo of
political significance to this affair in prophecies that Kah-thog Rig-'dzin Tshe-dbang nor-bu revealed to the ruler Pho-
lha bSod-nams stobs-rgyas (1689-1747); see rNam thar V. p. 173.2-3: "If the rebirth of [the minister Padma] Gung-
btsan raises the treasure of [Mang-yul Ri-boj dpal-'bar, joy I will reign in Tibet] for 25 years, it is said." (gung bisan
sprul pas dpal 'bar gter/ thon na nyer Inga bde bar gsungs). It ought to be recalled that Kah-thog Rig-'dzin Tshe-
dbang nor-bu also intended to raise the treasure of Mang-yul Ri-bo dpal-'bar but likewise was kept from doing so by
unfavourable circumstances, see Picter Schwieger, Tibetische Handschriften und Blockdrucke, Vol. 10, Stuttgart:
Franz Steiner Verlag (Verzeichnis der Orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland, XI/10). 1990, pp. 88-89.
26. See gDung rubs /. p. 144.8-14 (khri bsod nams dhang phyug Idei brsun mo dngos la sras mo gcig las sras ma byung
chine sras mo tha gcig de phyis yol mo sprul sku bsian dzin nor bui rigs mar gyur/ de la sras mo ma cig rwa ma'l
sprul par grags pa nor 'dzin dbang mo shes mkha'gro'i 'groi) mtshan dang dan pa zhig byung bango mtshar gyi
Itas du ma dang bcas dgung lo nyer Inga'i skabs mkha' la spyod pa'i grong khyer du gshegs zhes zer). This is
summarized in Chos 'byung II, p. 265.1-2 in the following words: "He took as a secret partner the daughter of the
king of Gung-thang, (of the family line of the Mahasammata [kings), bSod-nams dbang-phyug [by name]; she
possessed the signs of a däkini" (mang bkur gdung rabs gung thang rgyal po bsod nams dbang phyug gi sras mo
mkha' gro'i mishan rugs ldan pa gsang yum du bzhes). Another example from the 15th century shows that it was
not uncustomary for a princess of Mang-yul Gung-thang to be given to influential Buddhist yogins; during this time
we find the princess Chos-kyi sgron-me, the daughter of Khri Ha-dbang rgyal-mtshan (1404-1464), as the partner
of Bo-dong Pan-chen Phyogs-las ram-rgyal (1375-1451); her rebirths attained fame as the Yar-"brog rJe btsun-mas,
who presided over bSam-sding Monastery in Yar-'brog. See, for example, gDung rabs I, pp. 124.21-125.4. For a
detailed description of bs Tan- dzin nor-bu's relation with his consort and daughter see Rang gi rtogs pa brjod pa,
pp. 200.5-208.6, 232.1-245.5.
27. On his sojourn in Shel-dkar rdzong see Rang gi rtogs pa briod pa, pp. 232.1 ff.: the temple of La-phyi Chu-dbar is
first mentioned ibid. p. 204.1, and the common sojourn with the Tenth Karma-pa is found ibid. pp. 227.3 ff. The



Franz-Karl Ehrhard
school expanded, particularly those residing in the "regions of the gorges" (rong phyogs); we find the Third
Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku, for example, after a further visit to Shel-dkar - arranged again by the ruler of
gTsang - turning up in the valley of [b]Tsum, which today is located on Nepalese territory, this time at the
invitation of a certain sNgags-'chang Nam-mkha' seng-ge; in Byams-pa sprin, the old mTha-dul temple in
the skyid-grong valley, he was engaged in renovation works financed by, among others, one sNgags-'chang
Nam-mkha' kun-bzang 28
His greatest act of service to the school of the rNying-ma-pa, however, has to do with the phenomenon
of conscious rebirth. Detailed accounts by the Fifth Dalai Bla-ma have been handed down of how, at the
instigation of Rig-'dzin Ngag-gi dbang-po, the Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku "took upon himself the burden of
the residence" (gdan sa'i khur bzhes) after the death of his teacher - looking after, in other words, rDo-rje
brag Monastery in Central Tibet - and at the same time determining the next rebirth of his teacher, the
Second Do-rje brag Rig-'dzin Padma 'phrin-las. He still had time to carry out the investiture of the young
rebirth before leaving the mortal plane soon thereafter.29
The continuity of the incarnations of the founder of the Byang-gter lineage was thus guaranteed. As for
the extension of his own lineage, that of the helper during construction of the Bya-rung Kha-shor stupa, there
were obviously no detailed preparations made for the next incarnation such as could be observed for the first
two Yol-mo-ba Sprul-skus. In the following we shall see that a new rebirth satisfying the required conditions
did, nevertheless, appear. Conceming bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu's literary production aimed at consolidating lines
of rebirths, it may be said, finally, that they cover in similar fashion the lineage of his teacher and also his
own." Did he perhaps slacken his efforts on behalf of the next Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku in order to discover the
rebirth of his teacher?
monastery of Chu-dbar was originally under the control of the Phag-mo gru rulers; later it came into the possession
of the Zhwa-dmar-pa incarnations and finally was handed over by the Sixth Zhwa dmar-pa to the Tenth Karma-pa.
See E. De Rossi Filibeck, Two Tibetan Guide Books to Ti se and La phyi, Bonn: VGH Wissenschaftsverlag
Monumenta Tibetica Historica, 1.4), 1988, pp. 159-160.
28. The invitation to visit [b]Tsum is described in Rang gi rfogs pa brjod pa, pp. 240.6-241.1. sNgags-'chang Nam-
mkha' seng-ge was a member of the family mDo-bo-che which kept up the teachings of the 'Brug-pa bka-brgyud-
pa school of the same name; he received teachings from, among others, the Second and Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-skus.
See Thob yig. pp. 168.1.172.5, 131.1-138.3 (the cycle Byang gter thugs sgrub mam gsum). Concerning the
activities in Byams-pa sprin and the person of sNgags-'chang Nam-mkha' kun-bzang see Rang gi rtogs pa brjod pa,
p. 242.4. The latter is a grandson of the treasure-discoverer Rig-'dzin bs Tan-gnyis gling-pa (1480-1535). See also
note 44.
29. See rNam thar I, pp. 546.5-550.4, and rNam thar II. p. 124.4 ff., where the arrival of the Third Yol-mo-ba s Prul-
sku at Do-rje brag Monastery and the immediate circumstances surrounding the discovery of the Second Do-rje
brag Rig-dzin, along with the death of the Third Yol-mo-ba, are described from the perspective of Zur Chos.
dbyings rang-grol. Mention is made of a protracted illness that bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu fell victim to during his trip to
Nepal; see fol. 71a/6 (rigs dzin yol mo ba sngar yam bu rgyal pos gdan drangs dus bal tshad kyi snyun ro yod
pa...). In Chos 'byung I. p. 566.2-3, his relatively early death is explained in the following words: "As he was not
able to uncover the later profound treasure, the fault being that the favourable link broke, it is as if, to all
appearances, his term of life, too, was not fulfilled" (de yang zab gter phyi ma bzhes pa ma grub pas rten 'brel 'chug
pa'i skyon gyis sku tshe'ang tshad du 'khyol ba ma byung bar snang ngo). This refers to the thwarted treasure find
at Ri-bo dpal-'bar; see note 25.
30. In the colophon of rNam thar I, p. 552.5, the Fifth Dalai Bla-ma mentions a work of Rig-dzin Yol-mo-ba along
with a text of his brother Rigdzin Phyag-rdor nor-bu as two of his main literary sources. The biography itself, in
structural terms, draws on the verses of the work of bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu; in the introduction (p. 429.5) it bears the
title skyes rabs kyi phreng ba sum curtsa gsum gvi gsol debs shigs su bcad pa dri med paddkar bzhad pa'i 'phreng
ba. See also the text skyes rabs kyi 'phreng ha bstod pa pad dkar brgyan 'phreng ba, translated in Franz-Karl
Ehrhard, Philip Pierce & Christoph Cuppers, Views of the Bodhnáth-Stipa, Kathmandu: Eigenverlag (privately
published), 1991, pp. 18-26.



A Forgotten Incarnation Lineage: The Yol-mo-ba sPrul-skus
4. Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje (1647-1716)
A collection of the Fourth Yol-mo-ba s Prul-sku's autobiographical writings has been preserved that provides
insight into his personality and his activities in the Tibeto-Nepalese border region; the collection comprises
an "external biography" (phyi'i rnam thar), three internal biographies" (nang gi mam thar) and one "secret
biography" (gsang ba'i rnam thar). The availability of quite a great number of manuscript versions of this
collection shows the popularity of this representative of the incarnation lineage (see Appendix I and II).
In the English preface to one of the editions, Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje is characterized as "one of
the outstanding tantric masters of the Rnying-ma-pa tradition during the 17th century. He had strong karmic
links with Nepal where he had taken a number of previous embodiments." His relationship to the Third Yol-
mo-ba sPrul-sku is summarized in the words: "His chief master in his youth was Yol-mo-ba bs Tan-'dzin nor-
bu, the regent of rDo-rje brag." This statement is based on a rather cursory reading of the introductory
folios of the Phyi'i rnam thar, in the following I shall look into the passage more carefully and shall attempt
to clarify the incarnational status of Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje.
The name Yol-mo-ba bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu occurs in the introductory folios in connection with the father
of Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje, from the Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku the latter had received the name Rigs-
'dzin sTobs-Idan dbang-po chi-med rgya-mtsho'i sde and was further recognized by him as the incarnation
of a series of Buddhist masters. The lineage begins with the Bodhisattva IHa-lung dPal-gyi rdo-rje. It is
stated further that the father resided in the monastery Gyal-gling in gTsang during the time when the Third
Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku was fulfilling the duties of resident in rDo-rje brag - that is, after the death of Rig-dzin
Ngag-gi dbang-po in 1639. During this period the father addressed a "detailed petition" (zhu ba'i 'phrin
rgyas par) to his teacher and sent it to the province of dBus, that is, to rDo-rje brag. The reply from the pen
of the bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu is cited in full in the autobiography, and in comment upon it it is stated:
In accordance with the permission granted, the father was named to be the representative of the
great stūpa Bya-rung kha-shor in Nepal; having been appointed, (moreover,] overseer of all
monasteries of the nine valleys, he moved to the great stupa [Bya-rung) kha-shor."
31. Preface to the first edition, see Appendix I. This preface was incorporated into the second edition, published in the
same year, the latter manuscript derives from the library of H. H. the Fourteenth Dalai Lama. In the following I use
only the Phyi'i ram thar and cite it according to the first edition, supplementing readings on the basis of NGMPP
reel no. E 2676/4.
32. Phyi'i ram thar, pp. 5.1-6.1. Ha-lung dpal-gyi rdo-rje likewise plays a role in the myth of the Bodhnāth stūpa.
According to the inventory of sNgags-'chang Sakya bzang-po an elephant that was put to work during the construction
of the edifice utters the negative wish to be born as King Glang Dar-ma and to suppress Buddhist teaching; thereupon
a raven that happens to have been present expresses the desire to be allowed to kill the anti-Buddhist king in his next
rebirth. This is the monk dPal-gyi rdo-rje of lHa-lung; see the block print of mChod rten chen po bya rung kha shor
gyi lo rgyus thos pas grol ba (as in note 6), fol. 7b/4-6. For a historical interpretation of the attacks of Glang Dar-ma
against the first monastery foundings in Tibet and his assassination in 842 by IHa-lung dPal-gyi rdo-rje, the ninth
abbot of Sam-yas, see S. G Karmay (as in note 3), pp. 8-9 & 78. Concerning the incarnational status of the father
see Thob yig, p. 539: lha lung dpal gyi rdo rje nyid/ bsam bzhin sprul pa'i skur byon pa/ rig 'dzin 'chi med rgya mrsho
las/ zab gter chos kyi thob yig yod. These are the formulations of an important member of the mDo-bo-che family,
who was a disciple of Rig-'dzin sTobs-Idan dpa'-bo; concerning this person see note 39.
33. Phyi'i mam thar, p. 10.2-3 (zhes grang ba stsal pa Itar/ pha de nyid la mchod ren chen po bya meng kha shor gyis
Igyil gnas dzin grsos(bcol] rong khag dgu'i dgon gnas rhams kyi bdag por bdod nas/ kha shor mchod rten chen
po'i drung du phebs pa). The "nine valleys" refer to the region between the Trisuli Khola and the Bhote Kosi. The
administering of the monasteries by an incarnation of IHa-lung dPal-gyi rdo-rje may later have led the local lineage
of descent to appropriate the name. See Graham E. Clarke (as in note 4) p. 7: "... and the priestly lineage of
Melemchi was once it is claimed) Lhalung (t. Tha-lung) which connects it to the Nyingmapa lineage." Concerning
the dispersion of the lineage along the upper reaches of Melemchi Khola and Balephi Khola compare also G E.
Clarke, "A Malla Copper-Plate from Sindhu-Palchok." Journal of the Nepal Research Centre, 8 (1988), p. 108:
"Tamang of the Lhalung Lineage." For a parallel presence of a lineage that claims to go back to IHa-lung dPal-gyi
rdo-rje, in the upper reaches of the Bemdang Khola, see Corneille Jest. "Report on the Monuments of Northern



38
Franz-Karl Ehrhard
Faithful to the prophecies of his teacher, Rig-'dzin sTobs-Idan dbang-po took a consort and went about his
duties as representative at the Bodhnāth stūpa; at one point bad omens and dreams occurred - among other
things, the whole edifice leaned to the north - and soon thereafter a courier arrived with the news that the
Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku had passed away; he also bore a letter from sPrul-sku Phyag-rdor nor-bu, the
deceased's brother.
There follow descriptions of the dreams that his father and mother had and a trip the parents undertook
to La-stod Drang-so, the birthplace of Ngags-'chang Säkya bzang-po. The monastery Gyal-gling in g Tsang
is again mentioned, where, on the full moon day of the first Tibetan month of 1647, the new rebirth of the
Yol-mo-ba Prul-sku came into the world, attended by miraculous signs.34 The next place named is again La-
stod Drang-so, where the boy was required for the first time to put his incarnational status to the test by
controlling a natural event: he and his retinue came upon an "overflowing lake" (mtsho mo lud pa), and the
inhabitants of the region asked him for a "means to counteract" (bzlog thabs) the outpour of water. The name
of sNgags-'chang Sākya bzang-po was brought up, along with the fact that the local demons had been put
under oath" (vul 'di'i 'dre srin rnams dam la btags pa yin) at one time by him. In accordance with a prophecy
that the lake should be circumambulated, the child was put on the back of one of his retinue, and after the
prescribed circumambulation the lake returned to normal.
In order to succeed to bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu's office, he afterwards went to the scene of the latter's
activities, namely the site of dNgos-grub mtsho-gling in Mang-yul skyid-grong. In 1651, when the young
reincarnation was now four years old, the political situation in this valley situated on the border between
Nepal and Tibet was unfortunately not very peaceful, so that he took up an invitation from the inhabitants
of Gyes-phug; he was given charge of Sa-sprin Monastery and settled down in it with his family. 36
Next the biography describes the process by which the status of Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje as the
rebirth of bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu is tested: the "questioning by means of lots" (brtag pa sgril ba), carried out in
two different places. First, his father met with Gyal-sras Phyag-rdor nor-bu, the brother of the Third Yol-
mo-ba sPrul-sku, and other priests in Pha-drug Chos-bskor sgang, south of Shel-dkar rDzong. One sGam-
po sPrul-sku is specifically named as being among them; this sGam-po sPrul-sku was in possession of one
of the "five treasures that represent the body (of Padmasambhava)" (sku tshab gter Inga). The lot was cast
in the presence of these sacred objects, which bore the name sku tshab padma bdud 'dul, and the answer was
positive. The procedure was repeated in front of the statue of the Arya Wa-ti bzang-po in skyid-grong, the
so-called "Lord of skyid-grong" (skyid grong jo bo), but Phyag-rdor nor-bu and the rebirth's father were not
Nepal: Monuments of Rasuwa District," Ancient Nepal: Journal of the Department of Archaeology. 85
(1984/1985), p. 20.
34. Phyi'i mam thar, p. 10.3-15.4. I am here attempting to reproduce the flow of narrative in its rough features. A
complete and annotated translation of this interesting text would be a rewarding undertaking, particularly in view
of the still rather poorly documented background to the reorganization of relations between Kathman
instituted under the Malla king Pratāpa Malla (1641-1674); on this subject see, for example, M. Slusser, Nepal
Mandala: A Cultural Study of the Kathmandu Valley, Vol. 1, Princeton: Princeton Uiversity Press, 1982, pp. 70, 277.
35. Phyi'i rnam thar, pp. 15.4-16.3. This episode is not based on personal recollection; Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal learned
of it later from one of his followers. On the area of Drang-so in La-stod IHo as the homeland of sNgags-'chang
Sakya bzang po, see note 8.
36. Phyi'i mam thar, pp. 16.3-17.1. Concerning the situation in Kyid-grong it is stated: "At the time the eastern bank
of the skyid-grong River was in the possession of the king of Kathmandu, the three (tracts of land] 'Cang, Sher and
Dol in the possession of the king of Gorkha, and the village of Rag-ma in the possession of the genuine king of
Tibet and so forth. Thus people here in Mang-yul devoted themselves totally to strife, (as is customary of] bad
times" (de skabs skyld grong chu shar rgyud mnams yam bu rgyal'i [pos] bzung/cang sher dol gsum gor kha rgyal
po'i (pos) bzung/rag ma bod rgyal po gisang bas bzung ba sogs/mang yul 'dir dus zir zing) thab ['thab) brtsod
Irtsod) kho na byed pa la). The expression "genuine king of Tibet" must refer to the Fifth Dalai Bla-ma, who in
1642, with the end of the g Tsang rulers, assumed the reins of power in Tibet. Of interest in this citation is the
presence, in the middle of the 17th century, of Gorkha alongside the kingdom of Kathmandu on the trade route to
Tibet. Concerning the site called [dkar-ye) Ngos-grub mtsho-gling see note 51



A Forgotten Incarnation Lineage: The Yol-mo-ba sPrul-skus
personally present on this occasion. Again the decision fell in favour of the young boy. Although objects
from the treasure of Gyang[s] Yon-po lung - including four written scrolls - were thereupon handed over
to the father as signs of the incarnational status of his son, certain conditions later failed to be met, so that
the recognition extended to the son left something to be desired, with some people harbouring doubts
concerning his role as a rebirth.
What was the cause of this doubt surrounding the status of Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje as the Fourth
Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku, which repeatedly surfaced in spite of all proof to the contrary- According to my
observations, the sources cite two reasons: First, his role as a priest of the rNying-ma-pa school was already
legitimated by his status as an offspring of Rig-'dzin s Tobs-ldan dbang-po. Thus, in a personal meeting with
the Fifth Dalai Bla-ma, he is called merely the son" (sras); the same term is found in an official document
from the year 1676, likewise from the Fifth Dalai Bla-ma, confirming Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje as the
resident at the Bodhnāth stupa.38 A further piece of evidence for this is a passage in the biography which
describes a meeting between Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje and mDo-chen-pa Nor-bu bde-chen (b. 1617) in
La-ldebs, a high mountain valley south-east of Kyid-grong. This latter teacher, who studied directly under
the Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku, refused to take part in a consecration that Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje
performed for the local populace; the following reason has come down:
Nor-bu bde-chen spoke: "Now I won't come." The one in attendance (called] "Jigs[-med) grags(-
pa) [spoke up for his part): "It's all the same whether you are the reincarnation of bs Tan-'dzin nor-
bu or not. It's enough that you are the son of [Rig-'dzin) sTobs-Idan dbang-po."39
A second, related reason was certain remarks by the previous incarnation that probably always stood in the
way of official recognition for Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje. This was made clear during a meeting with the
Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku's daughter, who brought up the following points made by her father concerning
a possible rebirth:
[Some time after the notion arose to go to the region of La-stod, we, master and disciples, arrived
at Drang-so dGa-ldan. The daughter of the former incarnation was staying there, Chos-dzin by
name, the wife of Drang-so dGa-ldan-pa. When I offered an invitation as a relative (of hers,] she
replied, "This is deceitful and mendacious twaddle; my father, Rig-dzin Yol-mo-ba, said no further
37. Phyi'i ram thar, pp. 17.2-18.3. Obviously the whole affair was reported by sGam-po sPrul-sku to the Fifth Dalai
Bla-ma; see ibid, pp. 18.2-3 (slar sgam po sprul skus sne sbyor mdzad nas/ rgyal dbang mchog gi zhahs pad du cur
[bcar) rgyuli bka' gros mdzad 'dug kyang/ phyis surten 'brel ma 'grigs pas/ da Ita cung zad grags pa chung zhing
'ga' shig yid gnyis su 'gyur). The person in question is sGam-po-pa sPrul-sku Bzang-po rdo-rje; for a biographical
sketch of him see Chos 'byung 1, pp. 731.2-733.11. In the autobiography of the Fifth Dalai Bla-ma, a meeting with
the brother of the Third Yol-mo-ba and sGam-po sPrul-sku is noted for the year 1651. The latter took novitiate vows
under the Fifth Dalai Bla-ma; see Rrogs brjod II, p. 318.13-15. The discussion concerning the young Yol-mo-ba
sPrul-sku may have taken place on this occasion
38. See Rtogs brjod II, p. 680.2-3 (rigs 'dzin stobs Idan dbang po'i sras zil gnon dbang grags rdo rje); according to
Phyi'i rnam thar, p. 29.1, the name Zil-gnon dbang-grags rdo-rje or Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje was given by the
Dalai Bla-ma himself. For the way of addressing him in the official document see Dieter Schuh, "Eine tibetische
Herrscherurkunde des 5. Dalai Lama aus dem Jahre 1676," in D. Schuh, Grundlagen tibetischer Siegelkunde, Bonn:
VGH Wissenschaftsverlag (Monumenta Tibetica Historica, 3, 5), 1981, p. 309 (byang bdag rigs dzin yab sras kyi
brgyud 'dzin rigs 'dzin stobs Idan pali sras zil gnon dbang grags rdo rje). I supplement the translation given by
Schuh as follows: "Zil-gnon dbang-grags rdo-rje, the son of Rig-dzin s Tobs Idan-pa (dbang-po), who maintains the
lineage of Byang-bdag Rigs-'dzin, father and son = Byang-bdag bKras-shis stobs-rgyal and Rig-dzin Ngag-gi
dbang-po)."
39. Phyi'i ram thar, p. 39.1-2 (nor bu bde chen gyis (gyi zhal nas/ nga da len (lan) mi yongs/ drung pa jigs grags
ni bstan'dzin nor buisku skyes yin na ang 'dra/ min na'ang 'dra/stobs Idan dbang po'i sras yin pas mchog (chog/).
For the studies of Nor-bu bde-chen of the family of mDo-bo-che under the Third Yol-mo-ba Prul-sku see Thob yig,
pp. 75-95; they were undertaken in 1633 at the site of [dKar-yel Ngos-grub mtsho-gling in Mang-yul Kyid-grong,
The father of Nor-bu bde-chen is sNgags-chang Nam-mkha' seng-ge, who had invited bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu to the
valley of [b]Tsum; see note 28.



Franz-Karl Ehrhard
rebirth would come to Tibet." And there were many words besides. On one occasion, (finally] I
went to meet her, no matter what she thought; when I explained to her how the appropriate sign
came to be located on my body as well as several of the hidden facts of former times, [i.e., of my
past existence,] right then tears came into her eyes and the net of doubt was cut.
As in the case of the Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku, therefore, it is the visible bodily sign that in the end
qualifies Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje as the incarnation of the man who helped construct the Bodhnath
stūpa, even if the same reputation was not accorded to him as to his predecessor because of it. This is in part
obviously due to statements made by bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu himself to the effect that there would not be another
Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku in Tibet. Against this, we have the activities of Rig-'dzin sTobs-ldan dbang-po, who
groomed his son so effectively for the role of resident of Bya-rung kha-shor - and cultivated the memory of
his teacher and his teacher's lineage equally effectively - that the myth of the incarnation of the helper
during the construction of the magnificent building nevertheless continued to remain alive.
It would be a fruitful endeavour to examine the spiritual and political activities of Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal
rdo-rje in detail. For instance, he carried out assignments for the Fifth Dalai Bla-ma in Shel-dkar, maintained
close contact with the kings of Gorkha and Kathmandu (his sister was given in marriage to King Pratāpa
Malla) and on two occasions was appointed overseer of the monasteries of Helambu. Also preserved are
thorough accounts of his restoration work at Bya-rung kha-shor." Shortly after this work he founded the
monastery bSam-gtan gling in Rag-ma in the valley of Mang-yul Kyid-grong, and in the year 1709 we find
him in Mang-yul Ri-bo dpal-'bar busy renovating the temple there. Little is known of the final years of the
Fourth Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku's life; it seems that he stayed primarily at Sam-gtan gling. One disciple of him
repeatedly mentioned during this period is gTer-dbon Nyi-ma seng-ge; the copying of the "Outer
Biography" was done on his initiative.
5. Phrin-las bdud-'joms (1726-1789)
In the process whereby the incarnation of the First Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku was discovered, we saw how the
rebirth was born into the family lineage of a treasure-discoverer. The Second and Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-
skus were each the sons of disciples of the preceding incarnations. This phenomenon will also be witnessed
in the case of the Fifth Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku, but since his father simultaneously belonged to a treasure-
discoverer lineage, this latter needs to be briefly introduced
gTer-dbon Nyi-ma seng-ge (1687-1738) was a fifth-generation descendant of Rig-dzin bs Tan-gnyis
gling-pa (1480-1535). This treasure-discoverer of the Nying-ma-pa school had received the transmission of
40. Pyi'i rnam thar, pp. 49.6-50.4 (yang las [la] stod phyogs la 'gro ba'i snang ba shar nas/ nged dpon slob mnams kyi
[kyis) bram mtsho Igrang sol dga' ldan du slebs (bslebs de na skye bo mingon ma'i (sngon ma'i] bu mo chos 'dzin
zer ba/drang so dga'Idan pa'i bag gzhes (bshes) la yod pa/ kho bo'i [kho bos/ gnyen 'phrad la shog byas pas/ nga'i
yab rigs dzin yol mo ba de nyidi bod du sku skyes mi 'phebs gsungs pa yod pas/ 'di khos [ko] rdzun zog lab pa yin
zer/kha stong mang po byas 'dug/skabs zhig na ci sems kyang/ phrad pa la byon byung bas/ nga lus kyi rtags rme
ba 'di bzhin yod ishul dang/mngon sngon) gyi gsang ba'i lo rgyus kha cig bshad pas/ de kha rang du mig nas chi
ma (mchi ma/ phyung (byung] shing yid gnyis kyi dra ha michod [chod)). See the remarks of the Fifth Dalai Bla-
ma in rNam thar II, fols. 75b/6 fr., where there is mention of a possible rebirth in India. That no further rebirth
would come to Tibet is linked with the blocked recovery of the treasure in Ri-bo dpal-'bar; see note 25.
41. Phwili mam thar, pp. 78.2 ff. deals with the renovation work of the stupa in the years 1706/1707. The statement by
Dieter Schuh, "Ein Rechtsbrief des 7. Dalai Lama für den tibetischen Residenten am Stüpa von Bodhnath."
Zentralasiatische Studien, 8 (1974), p. 432: "A charge, primarily religious in motivation, to take up residence at this
stúpa, which was looked upon as particularly sacred by Tibetans, ought at least to have included certain duties
involving maintenance of the stupa ... But the family was evidently not very active in this regard..." (my
translation) must therefore be reconsidered. Concerning the sojourn in Helambu it may be noted that, according to
the information supplied by Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje. the first monastery founded by sNgags-chang Säkya
bzang po, went up in flames in the 16th century, during which "written scrolls" (gter shog) and "sacred substances"
(gter rdzas) from the treasures of Myang-ral Nyi-ma 'od-zer, Guru chos-dbang and Rig-dzin God-Idem 'phru-can
were destroyed: see Phyi'i mam thar, pp. 75.3-76.1.



A Forgotten Incarnation Lineage: The Yol-mo-ba sPrul-skus
the Byang-gter teachings from sNgags-'chang Säkya bzang-po, and like him had been active at the court of
the Gung-thang prince Kun-bzang Nyi-zla grags-pa. Pursuant to the ruler's requests he uncovered treasure-
works in Mang-yul Ri-bo dpal-'bar - a cycle that had been hidden there by Rig-dzin God-Idem 'phru-chu
as a "treasure work to be rediscovered" (yang gter) - and left behind one offspring, Tshe-dbang bSod-nams
rgyal-po by name.42
This offspring was the incarnation of Ngags-'chang Che-mchog rdo-rje of the mDo-bo-che family and
was made the "representative" (gnas dzin) of the temple of Mang-yul Byams-pa sprin. Among his teachers
we find the Second Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku Nam-mka' brgya'-byin.13 The lineage was kept alive by the eldest
son of Tshe-dbang bSod-nams rgyal-po: his name was sNgags-'chang Nam-mkha' kun-bzang. The Third
Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu and his brother Phyag-rdo nor-bu are mentioned as his main
teachers. What is focussed on above all else in the short sketch of his life is the renovation work done on the
temple of Mangs-yul Byams-pa sprin, during the course of which bsTan-'dzin nor-bu called Nam-mkha'
kun-bzang his "heart's son" (thugs kyi sras).44
The third generation of descendants of Rig-'dzin bs Tan-gnyis gling-pa is represented by the son of
Nam-mkha' kun-bzang, Guru Sākya rgyal-mtshan; he, too, felt responsible for the temple of Mang-yul
Byams-pa sprin, adorning it with statues and the like. Of his sons, the eldest was a certain sNgags-'chang
Karma'i mtshan-can, who divided the "convent" (bla brang) of Byams-pa sprin into two halves, an "eastern"
(shar ma) and a "northern" (byang ma) one. Further, objects from the treasures of Rig-'dzin bDud-dul rdo-
rje (1615-1672) from Eastern Tibet, came into his hands.
42. In providing information on the lineage of Rig-'dzin bs Tan-gnyis gling-pa, I shall cite in the following only the text
gDung rabs II; for the biography of Rig-'dzin bsTan-gnyis gling-pa see ibid.. pp. 5.4-12.3. This text is based in part
on the biography of gTer-dbon Nyi-ma seng-ge, which was written in 1769 by 'Phrin-las bdud-'joms; the latter work
was filmed in the autumn of 1991 with the kind assistance of Lama Kunsang of Tarkye-Ghyang; see Guru sürya
seng ge'i ram thar mdor bsdues nges shes 'dren pa'ishing ra, 36 fols., NGMPP reel-no. E 2691/6.
43. gDung rabs II, pp. 12.3-14.1. The lineage of the representatives of the monastery of Byams-pa sprin bears the name
gter-dbon-rgyud; for a translation of this term in the case of the family of Rig-'dzin bs Tan-gnyis gling-pa see Dieter
Schuh, "Eine Herrscherurkunde des 5. Dalai Lama aus dem Jahre 1670" (as in note 38), p. 370: "descendants of
treasure-discoverers in the (uncle-nuphew (order of succession)" (my translation). The connotations of the otten
used term khu-dbon that were read into the term gter-dbon do not apply: the latter is rather to be understood in the
sense of mes-dbon ancestor and grandson); for the term dbor-rgyud in reference to royal descendants, see Helga
Lebach, "Notes on the Tibetan kinship term dbon," in Proceedings of the International Association of Tibetan
would render gter-dhon-rgyud thus as lineage of the grandsons (1.e.
successors) of the treasure-discoverers." Therefore the assertions made by Graham E. Clarke, "The Great and Little
Traditions in the Study of Yolmo," in Ernst Steinkellner & Helmut Tauscher, eds.. Contributions to Tibetan
Language, History and Crelture, Vol. 1, Vienna: Arbeitskreis fur Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien Universität
Wien (Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde, 11), 1983, p. 27, would no longer be valid.
44. g Dung rabs II, pp. 14.2-15.3. For a description of the meeting from the perspective of the Third Yol-mo-ba s Prul-
sku, see note 28. A contemporary of Ngags-chang Nam-mkha' kun-bzang - and not to be confused with him - was
sNgags-'chang Nam-mkha' seng-ge; an offspring of the latter was mDo-bo-che'i sNgags-chang Nor-bu bde-chen,
who refused to accept Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje as the Fourth Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku; see note 39. It may be
pointed out that sNgags-'chang Nor-bu bde-chen for his part regarded his own son, bDud-'dul, as the reincarnation
of his father; see ibid, p. 15.1-2.
45. gDung rabs II, pp. 153-17.4. In connection with the treasures of Rig-dzin bDud-'dul rdo-rje, it may be mentioned
that, Guru Sakya rgyal-mtshan studied under g Ter-ston Gar-dbang rdo-rje (1640-1685) and also under O-rgyan
dpal-bzang (1617-1677); the latter was a disciple of Rig- dzin bDud-dul rdo-rje and had brought relics from Khams
to the region of present-day Thak Khola in Southern Mustang, which led to the founding of the monastery of sku-
tshab gter-Inga. See F.-K. Ehrhard, "Tibetan Sources on Muktinath. Individual Reports and Normative Guides,"
Ancient Nepal: Journal of the Department of Archaeology. 134 (1993), p. 26. Guru Sakya rgyal-mtshan also met
g Ter-ston Nyi-ma grags-pa (1647-1710), another treasure-discoverer from Khams, bestowing on him the complete
cycles" (chos skor yongs rdzogs) of the teachings of Rig.'dzin bs Tan-gnyis gling-pa. Both g Ter-ston Gar-dbang rdo-
rje and g Ter-ston Nyi-ma grags-pa discovered treasure works in the umple of Byams-pa sprin; see F-K. Ehrhard.



Franz-Karl Ehrhard
g Ter-dbon Nyi-ma seng-ge was the eldest son of sNgags-'chang Karma'i mtshan-can and the father of
the Fifth Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku. We learn from his short biography that his "root teacher" (rtsa ba'i bla ma)
was Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje; under him he studied primarily the treasure-cycle rDzogs chen yang tig
ye shes mthong grol, a finding of Rig-'dzin bs Tan-gnyis gling-pa, and became his "heart's son." Singled out,
as further teachers, are Kham-lung-pa Padma dbang-rgyal (1657-1731), Kah-thog Rig-'dzin Tshe-dbang nor-
bu and Do dmar-ba Rig-'dzin Padma rdo-rje (d. 1738).
The invasion of the Dzungar armies in Tibet in 1717 and the associated persecution of the rNying-ma-
pa school led Nyi-ma seng-ge to assume the life of a "renunciatory yogin" (bya btang gi brtul zhugs) and to
wander through the hidden lands in the south, as described in the next section of his biographical sketch.
With the aid of a teaching from the Byang-gter tradition, the Byang gter nad bdag stobs 'joms kyi man ngag.
he succeeded in halting an epidemic that was sweeping the Kathmandu Valley during this time; in
recognition of this he acquired a piece of land in Yol-mo from the king of Kathmandu, together with an
official deed inscribed on a "copperplate" (zangs yig bka'shog). Afterwards, in the centre of the hidden land
Yol-mo gangs-ra, he built the monastery Padma'i-chos gling and along with it, according to the "descriptions
of the sacred site" (gnas yig) and "list of prophecies" (lung byang) of Padmasambhava, a temple at the
summit of the mountain g Yang-ri-ma. The temple, however, soon succumbed to natural destruction.46
Approximately at the time when g Ter-dbon Nyi-ma seng-ge was receiving title to land in Yol-mo from
Jaya Jagajjaya Malla, there occurred the birth of his son "Phrin-las bdud-'joms. As we learn from his short
biography, the father recognized his son as a reincarnation:
On the basis of his character, in which, from childhood on the beneficial effects familiar from his
earlier (existence] became increasingly apparent, his father identified him as the reincarnation of
the '[spiritual] master of his family' (rigs bdag) Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje. An inquiry by lot
was also made at the great stūpa Bya-rung kha-shor, and there was a positive response.47
Happily, a detailed biography of Phrin-las bdud-'joms has been preserved, so that we can hear about the
whole affair straight from his mouth, as it were. His father's designation of him as a reincarnation thereby
takes on a different accent. The scene of events is a pilgrimage from Helambu to the Kathmandu Valley:
The way it is said to have happened was that the attendant of my father put a question to me, in
foolish talk, as to where the stūpa of Bya-rung kha-shor was located, and I [thereupon) raised my
finger towards the great stūpa, as well as making signs that it was located in that direction; my
father's heart was greatly joyed. And when afterwards my father, in checking the corresponding
omens that occurred in my case, made inquiry by lot at the great stūpa in order to identify] me as
the highest reincarnation of the teacher who is the spiritual) master of the family, and (although)
*Two Documents on Tibetan Ritual Literature and Spiritual Genealogy." Journal of the Nepal Research Center. 9
(1993), p. 81, note 5.
46. g Dung rabs I, pp. 17.4-19.3. See also the biography of g Ter-dbon Nyi-ma seng-ge according to the local tradition
of Helambu in G. E. Clarke (as in note 4) pp. 15-18. There, too, the translation of the two deeds for the land donated
by the king of Kathmandu Jaya Jagajjaya Malla (ruled 1722-1735) may be found; they date from the years 1723
and 1727. The site where Padma'i-chos gling Monastery was erected is located on the side of the mountain g Yang.
ri-ma, at a place where the bullock's horn was flung" (glang ra rgyag sa). This is the present-day village of
Tarkhye-Ghyang. The founding of the temple on top of the mountain g Yang-ri-ma actually predates the founding
of Padma'i-chos gling: the two foundings correspond to the two land deeds. The details of all these activities in the
centre of Helambu in the 1730s are found in the biography of g Ter-dbon Nyi-ma seng-ge (as in note 42), fols. 16b-
27h. A lengthy discussion follows about the raising of a treasure-work in the temple of Mang-yul Byams-pa sprin,
an act which is attributed both to gTer-dbon Nyi-ma seng-ge and to g Ter-ston Nyi-ma grags-pa. See also Chos
byung / pp. 369.25-370.19.
47. gDung rabs I, p. 22.4-5: sku na phra mo nas sngon gom (goms / gyi bag chags bzang po ches cher sad pa'i ngang
ishul las yah rje nyid kvi/kyis) rigs bdag zil gnon dhang rgyal rdo rje'i yang srid du ngos 'dzin par mdzad do/
mchod rten chen po bya rung kha shor gyi drung du brtag sgril mdzad pa'ung hab. Further variants of the
designation "Ispiritual] master of the family" can be found in the biography of 'Phrin-las hdud-'joms,



A Forgotten Incarnation Lineage: The Yol-mo-ba sPrul-skus
it came out positive, I nevertheless did not need his [i.e., my father's) offering of all these flatterers
and reincarnations."
The incarnational status postulated by his father, g Ter-dbon Nyi-ma seng-ge, having been rejected, the fate
of the lineage of the Yol-mo-ba sPrul-skus in the region of their origin was irremediably sealed by Phrin-
las bdud-'joms. No concrete reasons are given in the autobiography for this rejection; one may suppose,
however, that it had to do with the inheritance of the monastery in Yol-mo founded by his father. On the
basis of a passage from the text that has already been dealt with by earlier research, we know that Phrin-las
bdud-'joms visited the area around the upper reaches of the Yangri Khola after his father's death in 1738 and
was so disappointed by the decline of the "monastery's religious morals" (dgon pa'i chos khrims) that he
avoided returning until 1748, beginning renovation work in Tarkhye-Ghyang only afterwards. Moreover,
he was already connected with another spiritual lineage through the family of his mother, so that the social
prestige of an incarnation of his father's teacher was no longer of decisive importance. We shall briefly trace
these maternal family ties and his education down to the year 1748 in order to obtain at least a rough picture
of the last Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku from Helambu.
"Phrin-las bdud-'joms's mother, Chos-nyid rang-grol (d. 1746), was the daughter of rDo-dmar zhabs-
drung Mi-'gyur rdo-rje (b. 1675), whose family lineage is known above all as the first Tibetan group that
settled in the Glang-phrang valley north-west of Yol-mo. Like the move of g Ter-dbon Nyi-ma seng-ge to
the latter hidden land, this settlement process has to be seen in the context of the invasion of the Dzungar
armies in Tibet in 1717. It was in Glang- phrang (present-day Langthang) that "Phrin-las bdud-joms was
taught by his father and mother how to read and write; the first teachings received from his father are of the
Byang-gter tradition. In the same year he travelled with his mother to the region of Mang-yul sKyid-grong,
and in [dKar-ye] dNgos-grub mtsho-gling met the "Espiritual) master of our family" (hdag cag gi rigs kyi
bdag po), an uncle called Rig-'dzin chen-po rDo-dmar-ba Padma rdo-rje, whom we have already met as a
48. rNam thar /V. p. 18.4-6 (bdag nyid kyi mel tshe ba des bdag la mchod rten bya rung kha shor ga re/shes gre moi
['bre mo'l] tshul gyi dris yod 'dug par/ mchod rten chen po'i thad du mdzub mo sgreng zhing de phyogs su yod pa'i
brda'ston byed par yab rje nyid shin tu thugs mnyes tel de gong rje nyid rang la thugs Itas dra'ang byning ishod
kyi (kyis/ gang gi rigs bdag bla ma mchog gi sprul skur dogs pa'i mchod rten chen po'i drug du brlag sgril mdzad
pa 'bab 'dug kyang/ bdag la ni go (kho) rang gi mchod pa' spral spral dang sprul sprul gyi dgos pa med do). It
should be noted that in the year 1727 g Ter-dbon Nyi-ma seng-ge met Kah-thog Rigdzin Tshe-dbang nor-bu in
Byams-pa sprin and had received teachings from him, before this meeting the guardian deity of Byams-pa sprin had
conferred the status of being the rebirth of Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu upon the son of a certain gSer-
bzang ras-chen: see rNam thar V. pp. 125.3-126.2. This event is again testimony to the fact that the claims of Zil-
gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje were not accepted by official quarters; it may also have been one of the factors
contributing to 'Phrin-las dud-jom's reaction.
49. For a treatment of these events, based on the biography of Phrin-las bdud-'joms, see G. E. Clarke (as in note 43)
pp. 29-30. But compare rNam thar IV. pp. 29.6 & 30.3-4, where it is only the rejection of the right of succession
and not the activities commencing in his twenty-second year to preserve religious sites that is focussed on.
Concerning the biography itsell, it may be said that the first part of the text falls under the genre of narrative" and
bears the title Nang 'phrul pa'i rol rtsed rtogs briod due gleng ba dpvid kyi nyi ring phul byed (pp. 16.1-182.5); it
was penned by 'Phrin-las bdud-'joms. The concluding part of the biography, covering the years 1786-1789, owes its
existence to a disciple named Tshe-dbang Chi-med mgon-po (1755-1807) of the mDo-bo-che family (pp. 183.1-
266.3). Concerning this disciple see note 53.
50. rNam thar IV. p. 20.4. Of interest here is the fact that the place where 'Phrin-las bdud-'joms met his father at age
eight was the Ca-thang cave at the sacred site Heavenly Gate of Half-Moon Form (gas chen la gangnam sgo);
this is an alternative name of the Glang- phrang valley, referring to its status as a hidden land of the 'Nying-ma-pa
school. For a text of Do-dmar-ba Mi-'gyur rdo-rje dealing with the myth and localisation of the valley "Heavenly
Gate of Half-moon Form" see E-K. Ehrhard (as in note 5), pp. 341-346. A recently published history of the Do-
dmar-ba family - which traces the origin of its members to the region on the border between Gung-thang and La-
stod Byang-deals extensively with Rig-dzin Mi-'gyur rdo-rje and his activities: see Brag sne Kun-bzang chos.
phel, rNant grol rtsangs ndo dmar ba'i gdung rabs lo rgvus deb ther padma rīga'l do shal, Delhi: Dukney Tsan
Domar Namdolling, 1998, pp. 89.1-137.13.



44
Franz-Karl Ehrhard
teacher of his father gTer-dbon Nyi-ma seng-ge. He took the vows of a noviate at the sacred site of Ri-bo
dpal-'bar under this member of the Do-dmar-ba family and received the name Rig-'dzin "Phrin-las bdud-
joms. A further formulation used to designate his teacher is the teacher, who is the [spiritual) master of
the family" (rigs kyi bdag po bla ma); these very same words were also used to characterize Zil-gnon dbang-
rgyal rdo-rje as the teacher of the father of "Phrin-las bdud-'joms, that is, the family of Rig-'dzin bs Tan-gnyis
gling-pa. Here, perhaps, lies the true reason for the reserve shown towards the incarnational status that
"Phrin-las bdud-'joms's father had wished to see conferred on him: there were stronger ties to his mother's
family line (the descendants of Do-dmar-ba Mi-'gyur rdo-rje) than to his father's (the descendants of Rig-
'dzin bs Tan-gnyis gling-pa).
Another maternal uncle was likewise one of his teachers (rDo-dmar-ba Mi-'gyur rdo-rje had a total of
five sons): his name was rDo-dmar-ba Kun-bzang bsTan-pa'i rgyal-mtshan. His third teacher, whom he met
at the age of 16, again in (dKar-ye) dNgos-grub mtsho-gling, was Kham-lung-pa gSang-sngags bstan-'dzin,
a disciple of the Second rDo-rje brag Rig-'dzin Padma 'phrin-las (1640-1718): and again it were the
transmissions of the Byang-gter tradition that were received. In 1744, finally, he came into contact with a
representative of the family of mDo-bo-che named O-rgyan gSang-sngags bstan-'dzin, a disciple both of Zil-
gnon dBang-rgyal rdo-rje and g Ter-bdag gling-pa (1646-1714).
For the year 1747 the biography mentions the sojourn in Mang-yul Byams-pa sprin and the
consideration given to renovating this site. It is at this point in time that Phrin-las bdud-'joms hears of the
arrival of Kah-thog Rig-"dzin Tshe-dbang nor-bu in Nepal. Soon thereafter he is in the Kathmandu Valley
meeting with this most important of his teachers - in Bya-rgod phung-po-ri, that is, at Kimdol vihāra near
Svayambhūnāth. A description follows of a renovation of the Bodhnāth stūpa, and the teachings that "Phrin-
las bdud-'joms received from Kah-thog Rig-'dzin Tshe-dbang nor-bu at Bya-rung kha-shor.52
With this visit of "Phrin-las bdud-'joms to Bodhnāth, we have come to the last contact the local lineage
of the Yol-mo-ba sPrul-skus had with the Bya-rung kha-shor stūpa. The myth of the helper to the goose-
keeper obviously no longer had the same force as it did a hundred years earlier at the birth of Zil-gnon
dbang-rgyal rdo-rje. The Malla dynasty was showing signs of drawing to a close, and the rulers of Gorkha
were arming in preparation to seize control of the three kingdoms of the Kathmandu Valley. Concerning
"Phrin-las bdud-'joms, it may be noted that he rebuilt the temple and meditation cells founded in Yol-mo by
his father and upheld the tradition - again on the paternal side of his family-of maintaining the temple of
Mang-yul Byams-pa sprin. Thus the texts report that in 1765, at the age of 38, he constructed a new convent,
renovated the old temple and had religious objects made. In doing so, he caused the "earlier system of mDo-
chen" (sngar srol mdo chen lugs) to flourish again."
51. rNam thar IV, p. 21.2-6. The place called Kyar-ye is located in the vicinity of Mang-yul Ri-bo dpal-'bar and was
already used as a retreat place by sNgags-'chang Sakya bzang-po; see Chos 'byung I, p. 530.19. This is where Rig.
'dzin mChog-Idan mgon-po had been invited by the First Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku; see note 5. The site is also
mentioned - under the names skyid grong gi dgon pa dkar ye and skyid grong dkar ye - by the Second Do-rje brag
Rig-"dzin, in rNam thar III, pp. 355.6, 358.3; it was there that the teachings of sNgags-'chang Sakya bzang po were
transferred to Rig-'dzin Legs-Idan bDud-'joms rdo-rje. It was there, too, that mDo-bo che-ba Nor-bu bde-chen
received the teachings of the Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku in the year 1633; see note 39. Concerning the visit of Zil-
gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje to [dKar-ye) dNgos-grub mtsho-gling, see note 36.
52. r:Nam thar IV, pp. 45.5-50.2. Concerning the Kimdol vihāra and the renovation of the Bodhnāth stūpa by Rig-'dzin
Tshe-dbang nor-bu in 1748, see F.-K. Ehrhard, "A Renovation of Svayambhunath-Stüpa in the 18th Century and its
History (according to Tibetan Sources)," Ancient Nepal: Journal of the Department of Archacology, 114 (1989), pp.
4-5. Among the teachings that Phrin-las bdud-'joms received during his month in Bya-rung kha-shor was one
concerning a special transmission of Mahäkaruņika teachings, the text that 'Phrin-las bdud-'joms wrote on this
occasion was filmed by NGMPP under reel-no. E 1286/26: 'Phags pa thugs rje chen po'i dmar khrid bla ma'i zhal
lung zin bris su hkod pa, 14 fols.
53. rNam thar, IV. pp. 128.1 ff., and gDung rabs, II, pp. 24.5-25.3. The mDo-bo-che family, to which sNgags chang
Che-mchog rdo-rje belonged (see note 43), as did sNgags-'chang Nam-mkha' seng-ge (see note 28) and his son Nor-
bu bde.chen (see note 39), is obviously one of the oldest and most influential families in Mang-yul Gung-thang.



A Forgotten Incarnation Lineage: The Yol-mo-ba Prul-skus
The name under which 'Phrin-las bdud-'joms was known in the second half of his life shows us, finally,
that the last link in the incarnational chain active in the region of its origin - in spite of his own personal
choice to disregard the status-repeatedly returned to sacred sites for his spiritual practice that had already
been frequented by his predecessors. The name given 'Phrin-las bdud-joms by his disciples' generation,
namely "Dharma Master of m on-gnang" (mgon gnang chos rje), refers to a place in Mang-yul sKyid-
grong where the tutelary god Mahäkäla had revealed himself directly to the Tangut translator Tsa-mi Sangs-
rgyas grags (12th cent.), conferring on him the rights of ownership to the site; the place is thus called "[the
place] conferred by the protector" (mgon gnang).4 bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu, the Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku, had
already stayed in this place; the memory of his visit and its significance remained alive, even if corroborating
sources are missing:
[There] for a long time the reincarnation had stayed, the great Yol-mo-ba (s Prul-sku], and the
manner in which he met his own father, Lo-chen Chos-rje, in a pure vision, how they posed
questions and gave answers to one another, and so on - this is revealed clearly in his [i.e. the Third
Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku's Collected Works. His younger brother, Gyal-sras Phyag-rdor nor-bu,
likewise had stayed there.55
It is thus these recurring places of sojourn that endow the lineage of the Yol-mo-ba sPrul-skus with a certain
continuity. They are located primarily in the region of Mang-yul Kyid-grong and were visited from the
beginning of the 16th to the end of the 18th centuries. As far as the sites on the territory of Nepal are
concerned, that is, the sacred site of Bya-rung kha-shor and the hidden land of Yol-mo gangs-ra, this
continuity was lost, and with it the memory of the incarnational chain which had played such a great role in
the upkeep of the stūpa (for this sequence of the lineage see Appendix II).
Another offshoot of this interesting incarnational chain, however, shows that it was not forgotten very
long: the memory of the Yol-mo-ba sPrul-skus came back again - and were recontinued - in another region
in the borderlands of south-western Tibet. 56
The most important disciple of 'Phrin-las bdud-'joms, Tshe-dbang Chi-med mgon-po, wrote, according to his own
testimony, a mDo chen bla brgyud mam thar, which up to now has not been recovered: see his autobiography: Gur
gyi sngags ban ishe dhang 'chi med mgon po'i rang ishul chu 'habs su brjod pa lhung Thung snyan pa'i chu sgra,
Dalhousie: Damchoc Sangpo, 1982. p. 15.5. The first part of the text (pp. 12. 1-145.5) was completed by its author
in 1803; it was expanded by Brag-dkar rta-so sPrul-sku Chos-kyi dbang-phyug (pp. 146.1-163.4). Along with the
biography of 'Phrin-las bdud-'joms, this work contains informative material on the cultural and religious history of
Mang-yul Kyid-grong in the 18th century.
54. Besides the name mgon gnang chos rje one also finds rig 'dzin ngon gnang pa chen po; see g Dung rahs II, p. 22.4.
The site and its foundation myth are described, for example, by Zhabs-dkar Tshogs-drug rang-grol, who also pays
attention to the natural beauty of this retreat place; see his autobiography (as in note 8), pp. 725.8-765.12, and
Matthieu Ricard (as in note 8), pp. 366-385.
55. rNam thar IV. p. 183.5.6 (sprul pa skreyol mo ba chen pos yun ring du bzhugs shing dag pa'i gzigs snang sunyid
kyi yab lo chen chos rje dang mjal zhing ha lan mdzad tsh sogs gang gihka' 'bum du gsal/ cung /gcung/ rgyal
ba'i sras po phyag rdor or bus kyang bzhugs te). For the father of bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu, Lo-chen Ratnabhadra Prul-
sku, see note 15. According to Thob yig, p. 84.5, bs Tan-dzin nor-bu wrote a biography of his father. It has no more
survived than has the'edition of his entire writings. 'Phrin-las hdud-'joms had visionary meetings with the Third Yol-
mo-ba Prul-sku at the same site: see gDung rahs II. p. 25.6.
56. A second line branched off after Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje with a certain mThu-stobs rdo-rje (18th cent.), whom
we can thus also call the Fifth Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku. The next incarnation, a certain Rig-'dzin Padma 'phrin-ias
(1773-1836) chose dGon-pa byang in the area of g Ting-skyes, near the border of Sikkim, as his residence; this
lineage exists up to the present, with the Tenth Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku now residing in Gangtok. The history of the
"Tebirth from Yol-mo" down through this line can be found in m Tha'-hral rdo-rje, mshangs med dpal nigon blama
dam pa gting skyes dgon pa byang gi mchog gi sprul gyi 'Whrings rahs bcu'i mam par thar pa mdo isam brjod pa,
Thimphu-Delhi: Kunzang Tobgyal & Mani Dorje. 1979,



Franz-Karl Ehrhard
APPENDIXI
Editions and Autobiographical Writings of the Third and Fourth Yol-mo-ba sPrul-skus
bsTan-'dzin nor-bu
The Autobiography and Collected Writings (gSung thor bu) of the Third Rig-dzin Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku
bsTan-'dzin nor-bu, Vols. 2, pp. 465 and 376, Dalhousie: Damchoe Sangpo, 1977 [= I].
Collected Writings of Yol-mo sPrul-sku bsTan-'dzin nor-bu, pp. 506, Delhi: Lama Dawa, 1982 [= II].
Autobiographical Writings:
a. Rig sngags 'chang ba thams cad kyi 'khor los bsgyur ba rgyal ba chen po'i skyes rabs kyi 'phreng ba
bstod pa pad dkar brgyan 'phreng (for a translation see Franz-Karl Ehrhard, Philip Pierce & Christoph
Cüppers, Views of the Bodhnāth-Stüpa, Kathmandu: Eigenverlag (privately published], 1991).
1: 3 fols. (vol. 1, pp. 1-16); II: 3 fols. (pp. 1-6)
b. rTogs brjod mkhas pa'i ma rgyan
1: 19 fols. (vol. 1, pp. 6-44); II: 14 fols. (pp. 249-276)
c. Rang gi rtogs pa brjod pa rdo rje'i sgra ma'i brgyud mangs (written in 1632)
1: 102 fols. (vol. 1, pp. 63-267); II: 77 fols. (pp. 95-248)
d. No title: "Illustrations to the life of Yol-mo-ba bs Tan-'dzin nor-bu" (translation under preparation)
I: 9 fols. (vol. 1, pp. 45-60); II: ---
Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje
The Autobiographical Reminiscences and Writings of the 17th Century Nyingmapa Visionary, Rig-'dzin Zil-
gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje, pp. 497, Gangtok-Delhi: Gonpo Tseten, 1977 (= 1).
The Collected Autobiographical Writings and Works on rNying-ma-pa Philosophy of Rig-'dzin Zil-gnon
dbang-rgyal rdo-rje, pp. 351, Delhi: Tibet House, 1977 [= II).
Collected Writings of Zil-gnon dBang-rgyal rdo-rje. A Collection of Texts by an Exponent of the rNying-ma-
pa Tradition from the Sino-Nepalese Borderland, pp. 448, Darjeeling: Konchog Lhadrepa, 1985 (not
accessible to me).
Autobiographical Writings:
a. sPrul pa'i rigdzin chen po zil gnon dbang rgyal rdo rje'i phyi'i ram thar ngo mtshar rmad byung rna
ba'i bdud rtsi
I: 44 fols. (pp. 1-87): II: 25 fols. (pp. 1-51)
b. sPrul pa'i rig 'dzin chen po zil gnon dbang rgyal rdo rje'i nang gi rnam thar las zhal gdams gsung mgur
gyi rim pa nges don rgya mtsho
1: 64 fols. (pp. 88-215); II: 42 fols. (pp. 53-136)
C. Prul pa'i rig 'dzin chen po zil gnon dbang rgyal rdo rjeli nang gi rnam thar las zab lam bla ma'i rnal
'byor gyi rim pa byin rlabs dngos grub kyi bang mdzod
I: 25 fols. (pp. 216-265); II: 18 fols. (pp. 137-173)
d. Je bla ma rig 'dzin grub pa'i dpa' bo zil gnon dbang rgyal rdo rje'i dag snang gsang ba'i rnam thar
mkha" 'gro'i 'phrin glu
I: 16 fols. (pp. 266-296); II: 10 fols. (pp. 175-193)
e. sPrul pa'i rig 'dzin chen po zil gnon dbang rgyal rdo rje'i nang gi rnam thar las bstan bcos ljags bris kyi
rim pa dgos 'dod kun 'byung nor buli do shal
1: 101 fols. (pp. 297-497); II: 78 fols. (pp. 195-351)



A Forgotten Incarnation Lineage: The Yol-mo-ba sPrul-skus
APPENDIX II
Two further editions of the collected writings of Zil-gnon dbang-rgyal rdo-rje were filmed by the NGMPP
under reel-nos. E 2676/4-8 and AT 131/7-132/3. The second edition was part of the Tibetan collection of the
Nepalese National Museum (Chauni) and is now preserved in the Nepalese National Archives (Ramshah
Path); the illustrations of the sequence of the lineage up to the Fourth Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku are from this
manuscript.
Bibliography
Chos 'byung 1: Guru bKra-shis, sTag-sgang mKhas-mchog (18th/19th cent.), bsTan pa'i snying po gsang
chen snga 'gyur nges don zab mo'i chos kyi 'byung bagsal bar byed pa'i legs bshad mkhas pa dga'
byed ngo mtshar gtam gyi rol mtsho, pp. 1076, Hsining: m Tsho-sngon mi-rigs par-khang, 1990.
Chos 'byung II: Kun-bzang Nges-don klongs-yangs, Dog-sprul Rig-dzin (b. 1814), Bod du byung ba'i gsang
sngags snga 'gyur gyi bstan 'dzin skyes mchog rim byon gyi rnam thar nor buli do shal, 186 fols..
Dalhousie: Damchoe Sangpo, 1976.
gDung rabs 1: Tshe-dbang nor-bu, Kah-thog Rig-'dzin (1698-1755), Bod rje lha btsad po'i gdung rabs mnga'
ris smad gung thang du ji Itar byung ba'i ishul deb gter dwangs shel 'phrul gyi me long, pp. 32, in Bod
kyi lo rgyus deb ther khag Inga, Lhasa: Bod-ljongs bod-yig dpe-rying dpe-skrun khang (Gangs can rig
mdzod, 9), 1990, pp. 87-150.
gDung rabs Il: Chos-kyi dbang-phyug, Brag-dkar rta-so sPrul-sku (1775-1837), gТer dbon rig 'dzin brgyud
pa'i gdung rabs lo rgyus nor bu do shal, 18 fols., in A History of the Descendants of Gter-ston Bstan-
gnyis gling-pa by Brag-dkar-rta-so sPrul-sku Mi-pham-chos-kyi dbang-phyug with Other of the
Author's Works, Delhi: Lama Dawa, 1982, pp. 1-36.
rNam thar I: Ngag-dbang Blo-bzang rgya-mtsho, Fifth Dalai Bla-ma (1617-1682), Byang pa'i rig 'dzin chen
po ngag gi dbang po'i rnam par thar pa ngo mtshar bkod pa'i rgya mtsho, 64 fols., in bka'ma mdo
dbang gi bla ma brgyud pa'i ram thar, Leh: S.W. Tashigangpa (Smanrtsis Shesrig Spendzod, 37),
1972, pp. 427-553.
Nam thar II: ibid. Zur thams cad mkhyen pa chos dbyings rang grol gyi rnam thar theg mchog bstan pa'i
shing rta, 121 fols., NGMPP reel-no E 2247/2 (repr. as Collected Works (Gsung-'bum) of the Vrh Dalai
Lama, Ngag-dbang Blo-bzang rgya-mtsho, 9, Gangtok: Sikkim Research Institute of Tibetology, 1992,
pp. 1-242].
rNam thar III: Padma "phrin-las, Third Do-rje brag Rig-'dzin (1640-1718), 'Dus pa'i mdo dbang gi bla ma
brgyud pa'i ram thar ngo mtshar dad pa'i phreng ba, 213 fols., in bka' ma mdo dbang gi bla ma
brgyud pa'i rnam thar, Leh: S.W. Tashigangpa (Smanrtsis Shesrig Spendzod, 37), 1972, pp. 1-425.
rNam thar IV: Tshe-dbang 'Chi-med mgon-po, Gur-phu-ba (1755-1807), Rig 'dzin chen po karma bdud
'joms kyi rnam par thar pa gsal bar byed pa'i nyin byed ngo mtshar snang ba'i gter mdzod, 133 fols.,
Delhi: Lama Dawa, 1982.
rNam thar V: Chos-kyi dbang-phyug, Brag-dkar rta-so sPrul-sku (1775-1837), dpal rig 'dzin chen po rdo
rje tshe dbang nor bu'i zhabs kyis rnam par thar pa'i cha shas brjod pa ngo mtshar dad pa'i rol mtsho,
187 fols., in Collected Works (Gsung 'bum) of Kah-thog Tshe-dbang-nor-bu, Vol. 1, Dalhousie:
Damchoe Sangpo, 1976, pp. 1-376.
rTogs briod 7: Kun-dga' snying-po, Jo-nang Taranātha (1575-1635), Gyal khams pa tā ra năthas bdag nyid
kyi rnam thar nges par brjod pa'i deb gter shin tu zhib mo bcos thug par rtogs briod, 331 fols., Leh: C.
Namgyal and Tsewang Taru, 1982.
rTogs brjod II: Ngag-dbang Blo-bzang rgya-mtsho, Fifth Dalai Bla-ma (1617-1682), Za hor gvi ban de ngag
dbang blo bzang rgya mtsho'i 'di snang 'khrul bar rol rtsed rtogs brjod kyi tshul du bkod pa du ku ta'i
gos bzang glegs bam dang po, pp. 718, Hsining Bod-ljongs mi-dmạngs dpe-skran khang, 1989,
Thob yig: Nor-bu bde-chen, Mdo-chen-pa (b. 1617) et al., A Collection of Records of Teachings and
Initiations Received by Masters of the Gur-phu or mDo-chen Tradition of the Rnying-ma-pa, pp. 605,
Dalhousie: Damchoe Sangpo, 1980.



Franz-Karl Ehrhard
PICTURES
ORAZ
1. The helper of the woman keeper of geese
2. The Buddhist minister Padma Gung-btsan
2.1
3. The treasure-discoverer sNgags-'chang
Sakya bzang-po
4. Second Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku
Nam-mkha' brgya-byin



A Forgotten Incarnation Lineage: The Yol-mo-ba sPrul-skus
49
SH
5. Third Yol-mo-ba sPrul-sku
bsTan-'dzin nor-bu
6. Fourth Yol-mo-ba Prul-sku Zil-gnon
dbang-rgyal rdo-rje



THE SHIFTING TERRAIN OF THE TANTRIC BODIES OF
BUDDHAS AND BUDDHISTS FROM AN ATIYOGA PERSPECTIVE
David Germano
(University of Virginia)
The present paper examines the tantric figuration of the body from the perspective of the eleventh through
fourteenth century Tibetan Atiyoga tradition. The first part outlines a general scheme of the body within
Indian Buddhist tantra from a perspective that attempts to show how the Atiyoga's own understanding of the
body, while unusual, is a deeply creative interpretation of long standing Buddhist trends. It is thus important
not to misunderstand the general statements made herein as an attempt to talk about Indian Buddhist tantra
per se, for which they are surely quite inadequate. The second part turns to Atiyoga's own highly distinctive
interpretation of the body against that background.
I would like to note my gratitude at being able to include this study in the present volume in honor of
Gene Smith. Having been inspired for many years by Gene's legendary corpus of Tibetan historiography, it
has been a great pleasure to be equally inspired by his impressive work at digitizing Tibetan texts and
reference materials over the past few years, as well as a close friendship with someone who is as wonderful
a human being as he is a scholar.
PART 1: INDIAN BUDDHIST TANTRA FROM TIBETAN PERSPECTIVES
While the tradition in question has a Sanskrit rubric (Atiyoga), undoubtedly is the elaboration of a movement
that has its inception among Indian figures in the eighth century, and claims itself to be authored by a series
of famous eighth century Indian Buddhists (Surativajra, Manjuśrīmitra, Jñānasūtra, Vimalamitra and
Padmasambhava), my own research indicates that in fact the tradition represents arguably the first truly
innovative transformation of tantra into a distinctively Tibetan form during the eleventh to twelfth century.
Its own apophatic rhetoric and mythic authorization of visionary revelation and excavation of texts presented
in form of the channeled voices and pens of Buddhas (redacted as The Seventeen Tantras), Indian Panditas
and Indian Siddhas (redacted as The Seminal Heart of Vimalamitra) performed an intertwined function of
maintaining a permeable boundary through which Indian tantra could be both assimilated and yet
transformed in creatively Tibetan manners. This boundary allowed these early Tibetan formulators of the
tradition to avoid the dangers of succumbing to the immense pressure of Indological conformity stemming
from the sudden massive importation of Buddhist Indians in the bodily presence of Panditas and Siddhas, as
well as the bodily presence of the Buddhas painstakingly reconstructed in Tibetan graphemes and bodies
through the large scale translation project which swept over Tibet from the eleventh to thirteenth centuries.
The tradition thus represents a creative Tibetan synthesis of the cutting edge of Indian Buddhist tantrism in
the eleventh century, as well as possibly Hindu tantric streams, particularly from Kashmir
While there has been of late well deserved criticism of scholarship which uncritically uses later Tibetan
tantric values, beliefs and classification schemes to schematize the history of Indian Buddhist tantra, there
is also a equally problematic potential Indological trend of falsely constructing a watertight bounded zone
of "pure" Indian tantra uncontaminated by the alien bodies of those who prowl outside the pale of India
proper. In fact, Indian Buddhist tantra was clearly, like so much of Buddhism, a profoundly international
movement (particularly from the seventh to twelfth century) which transgressed cultural barriers in such
ways as to explode the ritually constructed space of cultural purity in which it is sometimes coerced into
inhabiting. In particular, tantra took deep root in Tibet from at least the seventh century onwards, and in the
simultaneously final flowering and withering of Buddhist tantra on the Indian subcontinent during the
eleventh to twelfth centuries, Tibetans constituted a major force in the state of tantra in South Asia. The
reduction of this to the utilization of Tibetan translations of Indian texts to supplement a fragmented body
of surviving originals in Sanskrit, Prakrit, and so on, thus results not only in an un-tantric ideology of



The Shifting Terrain of the Tantric Bodies
51
constructing barriers where none exist to create and maintain a zone of imagined purity, but also results in
the scholarly resurrection of a crippled Buddha, a mandala only partially shaded in and riveted by abyssal
gaps where dialogues become monologues and interaction becomes individual action. This tendency has
been perhaps unintentionally supported by the emphasis in some circles of locating Hindu tantra
increasingly within a Vedic-informed mainstream and deconstructing the earlier, and admittedly
problematic, invocation of an orgiastic tribal culture or substratum that disrupts that mainstream, disruptions
which often seem placed in that same Himalayan zone where Tibeto-Burmese culture has traditionally
dominated. These tendencies are particularly problematic in discussing the nature of subtle bodies in
Buddhist tantrism, since there has been at this point no convincing evidence adduced to place such ideology
and praxis any earlier than the eighth century, and it appears Tibetans were involved in creative lineages of
these transmissions from very early on. For these reasons, I would suggest that looking into the ideology and
praxis of bodies, and particularly subtle ones, in ninth to twelfth century Buddhist and Hindu tantra demands
hermeneutic transgression, in particular that of the false cultural boundaries with which we have shaped our
object of inquiry into an unconscious reflection of our own inevitable scholarly limitations and biases.
My paper will thus have two parts: (i) a brief survey of Indian Buddhist tantra with a focus on
paradigms governing the body in the context of the Tibetan Atiyoga tradition's interpretative stance, and (ii)
a presentation of the Seminal Heart (snying thig, *citta-tilaka) Atiyoga or Great Perfection (rdzogs chen,
*mahäpurna) tradition with a focus on how its contemplative traditions of the subtle body are presented as
transcending the perceived limitations of the deity yoga-oriented paradigms of earlier Buddhist tantra.
Tantra as Deity-yoga centric: encounter to identification and back again
The later phases of Buddhist tantra in India known under the rubric of the Anuttarayoga tantras generally
classified their various contemplative techniques into two sequentially ordered types: generation phase
(bskyed rim, utpatti-krama) and perfection phase (rdzogs rim, utpanna- or sampanna-krama) practices
respectively. This categorization was partially an attempt to introduce innovative contemplations (the latter)
and theoretically justify them as complimentary processes to previously standard tantric contemplative
practices (the former). The perfection phase is thus generally understood as bringing the generation phase
practices to "perfection" or "completion," thereby both integrating with, and subordinating, the earlier
standard modes of contemplation. The generation stage praxis of visualizing self as Buddha gives rise to a
vision of transcendence in stark contrast to one's mundane existence (generation), and that vision is then
fully embodied by perfection stage praxis as it culminates in the visionary's thorough physical incarnation
of a new order of existence (perfection), a new organizing principle that begins to assert itself in and as
oneself.
However, in An Esoteric Precept: The Garland of Views, a Mahāyoga text attributed to
Padmasambhava in the late ninth century, we find the expression "the triad of generation and perfection"
(bskyed rdzogs gsum). This is used doxographically to present the highest tantric teachings as being a
tripartite "inner yogic tantric vehicle of efficacious means" (ral 'byor nang pa thabs kyi rgyud kyi theg pa):
the generation mode (bskyed pa'i tshul), the perfection mode (rdzogs pa'i tshul) and the great perfection
mode (rdzogs pa chen po'i tshul). In the current context I would like to suggest utilizing this model to instead
classify the wildly heterogeneous and plural history of Buddhist tantric contemplation into three distinct yet
1. My presentation of various approaches to the body in Indian Buddhist tantra is an imaginative reconstruction of the
Seminal Heart reading of that history. It thus focuses on how Tibetans appropriate, simplify and nuance Indian
Buddhism, and should not be understood as attempting an objective Indological survey that adequately details the
pluralistic nature of Indian Buddhist tantra in its own right on these issues.
2. Cozort 1986, pp. 27 and 41.
3. The text appears to genuinely be quite old, though it may be impossible to ever definitively prove that it actually
goes back to the hand of Padmasambhava rather than a somewhat later and still unknown Tibetan author.
4. See Karmay 1988, pp. 155-158 and 173.



52
David Germanos
often intertwined phases that to some degree were chronologically successive. In simplistic terms, my
adaptation of the model in the present context signifies (i) the visualization practices that involves scripted
imaginal evocations (sādhana, sgrub thabs) of pre-described forms of a Buddha located either external to
oneself or, in what came to be known as deity yoga, transmuting the practitioner's own bodily self-
perception; (ii) non-conceptual and image-free meditation following the dissolution of imaginal processes,
the transition of visualizations into spontaneous naturally occurring visions, or subtle body praxis involving
detailed representations of the body's interior that goes hand in hand with the explosion of horrific and
sexual imagery; and (iii) the radical deconstruction of complex deity-yoga centered tantric contemplation
that tends to aestheticize the cruder aspects of tantric focus on sexuality, violence and death, while
contemplatively favoring either strict non-conceptual states, simple visualizations or imaginal processes that
are centered around more spontaneous image flow.
In proposing this threefold model, I am in no way suggesting my brief analysis does justice to the
immense diversity of Indian Buddhist tantra nor the equally vast gaps in the surviving evidence, whether,
literary, ethnographic or archaeological. Instead I am adapting a relatively late indigenous scheme for
modeling that diversity as a way of suggesting how some later Indians and Tibetans narrativized the
symbolic logic of the historical development of tantra. This may in turn offer insights into a possible broad-
based scheme for understanding the actual history of Buddhist tantra in India which illuminates some of its
particulars, though necessarily gliding over, and marginalizing, others. Based upon the pervasive historical
doxographical attempts to classify tantras and the many associated models such as "the triad of generation
and perfection," I term this a narrative in the sense of a mode of thematically structuring a wide variety of
materials and movements into a sequentially unfolding series of developments that comes to a climax in the
final revelations. The three elements of this narrative are inextricably linked by two common loci of
concern: (i) the encounter with Buddha(s) on shifting terrains, ranging over the space in front, the surface
of one's body, the body's mute interior and the body's mapped interior; and (ii) a grounding within bodies
on every imaginable register, including the many bodies of the Buddha, one's own body as a locus for the
dreamed of encounters, and the body as a premier tool for thinking and writing of texts. The earliest phase
of (i) visual encounters with the Buddha are eventually formalized and extended in the "generation stage"
practice of ritually fabricating a new divine body for oneself in deity yoga; the later phases of (ii) deepening
that fabrication through an instantiation of the Buddha's interior reality via subtle body praxis are known as
the "perfection stage"; and the return to (iii) a naturalistic rejection or transformation of all such praxis in
preference for a celebration of the mute, ineffable divinity of the body's ordinary reality came to be known
most commonly as the Great Perfection or the Great Seal (phyag rgya chen po, mahamudrā).
Buddha-encounters in Mahāyāna ritual and vision
I will begin by briefly looking to the origins of Buddhist tantra in India, which would appear to lie in those
elements of Mahāyāna that are literally, and literarily, obsessed with the physical form of the Buddha(s), in
other words, his visible bodies. Snellgrove has argued that early Buddhist "tantra" (which he terms
Mantrayāna), later doxographically classified as "Kriya" and "Caryā" (both words meaning a rite of any
kind), was in fact not originally anything other than the main ritual texts accompanying standard Mahāyāna
sūtras. At a time when later specifically tantric images, ideologies and practices seem to have been
5. While all three stages temporally overlap in Indian Buddhism, a clearer chronological succession can be discerned
with the first and second, while the delineation between the second and third is more based on developmental logic
than temporal sequence. My scheme thus bears only a general relationship to the more temporally oriented
classification of an early, middle and later period Indian Buddhist tantra by Matsunaga (see de Jong 1984, p. 92),
6. See Cozort 1996 for a brief overview of tantric sādhanas.
7. See Hopkins 1996 for a related discussion of how Tibetan doxography structures a dynamic worldview. In the
present context, the particular style and orientation of the narrative derives from the perspective of the Atiyoga
tradition which is the subject of my paper.
8. Snellgrove 1987, pp. 233-4.



The Shifting Terrain of the Tantric Bodies
unknown, these texts provided "the directions and liturgies for the worship of the regular Mahāyāna
divinities and... introduced the kind of consecration ceremony for a would-be Bodhisattva." These texts and
the Mahāyāna religious practices they represented lack the complicated initiatory structure with attendant
vows that characterized later Buddhist tantra, though subsequent tantric exegetes retroactively claimed them
as part of their own history. According to Snellgrove, they also lacked extended speculative material beyond
the description of ritual procedures, since in fact they written as complements to the speculative materials
found in the standard range of Mahāyāna Sätras to which they were linked.
In part, the development of ritual Mahāyāna was driven by the reappropriation of Vedic ritual
technology for ritually fabricating a divine body and evoking divine presences, as well as various
interactions with those divinities. Once Mahāyāna proponents begin to create a renovated ritual system
supporting its emergent cults of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, it became a pressing need to mark ritual space,
ritually construct the deities' bodies, invite and evoke the deities, make offerings to the divine presences, and
conduct other transactions. A turn towards Vedic and later Hindu ritual apparatus was natural given that the
basic technology and ideology for inviting and interacting with divine presences in a human space was
already fully worked out in the wider spectrum of general Indian religious life in which Buddhism was
always situated. Although this importation of ritual was resituated within a quite different religious discourse
and brought into the service of entirely new gods, it remains a valid area of inquiry to ask what types of
ideologies also reentered Buddhism in the process, ideologies indelibly inscribed in the ritual forms
themselves. At any rate, in brief, these early stages of "tantra" gradually developed into a "mandala, mudrā
and mantra" brand of Buddhist practice, as the sought after presence of the Buddha(s) increasingly involved
the ritual manipulation of mantras and mudrās to interact with a divine presence situated within a wider
configuration of sacred figures. Developmentally, we can also trace a gradual shift from pure encounters
with an autonomous Buddha appearing in the field of vision, to an ideology of identity-transference where
the Buddha descends as a gnostic spirit (ye shes babs) directly into the practitioner's own body, which
had already been imaginatively transfigured into the Buddha's surface body image: from encounter to
identification. This profoundly non-Vedic element of standard and widespread self-identification with
deity of course had already entered post-Vedic forms of discourse and practice from the Upanishadic
literature onwards.
These movements were rooted in earlier practices of "recollecting the Buddha" (buddhānusmrti), which
utilize various techniques to evoke a sense of the absent founder of the tradition, a founder whose numinous
presence had gradually been relocated in a variety of cosmic figures in addition to the historical Sākyamuni.
It should be pointed out that this recollection also involved a focus on the moral and mental attributes of the
Buddha, but that it was the highlighting of his bodily image that personalized this recollection beyond a
mere cultivation of valued yet abstract ethical and intellectual qualities. In other words, it was the concern
with physical presence that rendered these meditations into a visceral encounter with the Enlightened One,
a dramatic scenario unfolding in real bodily time. And it is with this physical presence that we could perhaps
locate the prehistory of subtle body discourse in Buddhism, in this passionate concern for the marvelous
external physical marks of the Buddha, most famously in the codified set of thirty two characteristics
(laksana, mtshan) and eighty secondary distinctions (anuvyañjana, dpe byad bzang po). My point here is
that the early concern for the Buddha's physical form, his rūpa-kāya, focuses exclusively on the superficial
attributes of his body's surface, as does the corresponding early contemplations. In addition, the early
accounts clearly involve bodily encounters, not visceral attempts to concretely embody the Buddha's
presence within one's own body image. The Pratyutpanna Sūtra discussed and translated by Harrison
presents the encounter scenario in its purest terms, without any trace of self-identification with the deity
(nor any later tantric facets such as the sexualization or horrification of the Buddha mandala, subtle bodies,
9. Harrison 1978, p. 38.
10. Wayman 1957.
11. I borrow this word from David Need, who coined it in this context.



David Germano
or transgression). Most interestingly for reasons that will become clear below, we find that the subject is not
the scripted Buddha encounters so common in Mahāyāna ritual, but rather concentrated practice in the hope
of a spontaneous visitation unfolding of its own accord in either daytime or in dreams. The contemplative
guidelines are rather general, but they clearly focus the practitioner's attention on the Buddha's visual form
using oral or written texts describing these Buddhas as a basis. Harrison argues that literary accounts of
quests involving visions of Buddhas - such as the famous story of Sadāprarudita in the Aşñasähastrika-
prajñāpāramita-sutra - are more than mere dramatic elements, but rather reflect the widespread nature of
these types of practices.
In addition, Harrison sees two quite different traditions of this concern for Buddha visions and
encounters in terms of relationships to the emptiness and Bodhicitta discourse and praxis of the
Prajñāpāramitā Sūtras. Texts such as the Sukhāvativyūha completely ignore emptiness discourse, treat the
Buddha encounter as an actual event involving rebirth in his pure land, and are largely motivated by a desire
for the material and sensual goal of rebirth in the paradisiacal pure land; in contrast to this, the Pratyutpanna
Sūtra integrates emptiness discourse, treats the Buddha encounters as dream-like encounters stemming from
the practitioner's own mind that can occur throughout life, and advocates being motivated by the altruistic
desire to gain enlightenment. In the latter context, the ontological status of the vision is explicitly raised as
an issue, 16 in response to which it is stressed that the visions must not be reified or become the source of
attachment. Instead the visions are dream-like, and the reader is urged to not consider as experiences of real
entities. In this context, there are extended discussions of emptiness which strongly stress the importance of
integrating concentration on the Buddha's visual form with an understanding of emptiness. This integration
of Buddha cults and emptiness is an important precursor to the ideology of deity yoga, where the mind
perceiving emptiness is none other than that which appears in the form of the deity's body.17
It should be noted that the spontaneous element of unexpected apparitions is stressed, with limited
visualization being a means to that end; this is in contrast to later tantra were the ritualized sequences of
visualization increasingly assume the center stage. Finally, in addition to the desire to worship (püjā) the
divine presence as a merit-producing activity, the visions of Buddhas are sought in order to hear their
canonical voice resound once again, resulting in the reception of often totally unknown teachings. Thus the
sense of hearing was at least as important as seeing, thereby connecting these contemplative processes to
the production of new canonical literature as well as to that literature's continued oral narrative setting ("I
once heard..."). In other words, these practices ensured that there was continued legitimate access to the
voices of the Buddhas that was extra-canonical, i.e. revelatory beyond transmitted bodies of scripture.
These developments in early Mahāyāna were linked to the phenomena of the expanding Buddha, i.e.
the process in which focus on the historical ſākyamuni was gradually displaced, or diversified, into a wide
variety of Buddhas believed to simultaneously exist in various dimensions.20 In conjunction with this, the
recollection of the Buddha became a cultic practice directed at plural Buddhas, a process which perhaps
contributed to a greater aestheticization as the Buddhas in question no longer were located within mundane
historical scenarios. The image of the Buddha is inextricably bound up with the figure of the Teacher, such
that a Buddha is generally thought of in terms of the dialogic environment of a teacher surrounded by
students. These new Buddhas, no longer linked to a historical life in the recent past, were thus thought of as
12. Harrison 1978, p. 43.
13. Harrison 1978, pp. 45-46.
14. Harrison 1978, pp. 46-48.
15. Harrison 1978, p. 51.
16. Harrison 1978, p. 46.
17. In its later manifestation as the so-called "illusory body" (see below), the deity's body is explicitly described as like
a dream, mírage, and so on.
18. Harrison 1978, p. 52.
19. Harrison 1978, pp. 50 and 54.
20. Harrison 1978, pp. 39-40.



The Shifting Terrain of the Tantric Bodies
55
surrounded by retinues in real-time yet alternative dimensions more optimal than this impure world so
familiar to us, such that their optimal local cultures of teaching, practice and study were globalized into
entire worlds referred to as "Buddha fields" (buddhakşetra),21
In this development of pure land discourse, we can thus see the incipient development of the tantric
mandala, as well as how this mandala functions in part as an image and model for human culture itself, if in
an idealized form. At the root of the Buddhist mandala (dkyil "khor) ideology, we thus find two aspects: an
explicitly pedagogical resonance to the principle of the center (dkyil) surrounded by a periphery (khor), and
the investiture of absolute authority and value in the physical presence of the Teacher at center. The seeds
for later ambiguities and difficulties of tantric ideology in terms of broader socio-political dynamics are thus
already present during this early period, if we may be excused for inquiring into the as yet Jatent issue of
those caught between the fields of distinct Buddhas, "each in his own world."2 Aside from the discourse of
articulating the celestial culture of Buddhas as well as their evolving configurations of interrelation, another
possible source for mandala ideology as well as particular gestalts lies in the arrangement, and
rearrangement, of images of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas upon altars for worship.2" To return to our concern
with encounter scenarios, rebirth in these new Buddhas' optimal cultures came to be an important religious
goal, which techniques for contacting them greatly facilitated. Thus these new Buddhas became the object
of recollection praxis, as well as objects of worship 2* As some individuals increasingly found these practices
to be a locus where something of supreme value was being worked out, they gradually evolved into a body
of ritual practice that provided scripted encounters with the Buddha in which structured contemplative
sequences utilizing visualization, hand gestures (mudrā), liturgy and repetition of special verbal formulas
(mantra) were used to imaginatively fabricate the Buddha's physical presence,
When encounter becomes transference
This evocation or fabrication of the Buddha's bodily presence presumably underwent a series of phases.
which has as of yet been only imprecisely traced. For instance, it would appear that in line with the pure land
developments, the frames of reference for recollection gradually expanded to include the entire milieu of
beings constellated around a given Buddha, which towards the center would include other Buddhas or
Bodhisattvas, and towards the periphery more subsidiary or ancillary figures participating within his cultural
configuration. However two factors seem to have to have been particularly important in these shifts
advancing the practice towards status as a semi-independent vehicle of practice, symbolism and even
systematic literature: () gradually viewing these practices as of central soteriological significance and (11)
shifting from simple encounters with the Buddha to actual self-identification with this ultimate source of
authority and canonical voice. Not only was the Buddha's wisdom spirit (ye shes, jñāna) eventually
understood to descend into the ritually fabricated body, thereby rendering it indistinguishable from the real
Buddha, but in a move that came in many circles to constitute the defining mark of tantric Buddhism, this
dynamic presence came to be appropriated as the practitioner's own revised self-identity and body-image.
It was this final development that came to be known as deity yoga (Tha'i rnal 'byor, deva yoga), the art of
psycho-physical unification with the Buddha.
For this reason, later tantric scholars often argued that deity yoga itself was the defining mark of
Buddhist tantra from beginning to end. One of the most powerfully argued positions to this effect is that of
the fourteenth century Tibetan founder of the Geluk (dge lugs) tradition, Tsongkhapa (Tsong kha pa, 1357-
1419), whose masterly survey of tantra, The Great Stages of Mantra (sNgags rim chen mo) has been partially
21. The notion of looking at a mandala as in some sense a human culture has been thematized by Samuel 1993 in the
context of Tibetan religious civilization. It is also used in a less grand, but nonetheless quite interesting fashion in
Need 1993.
22. Harrison 1978, p. 39.
23. Both possibilities are discussed in Hodge 1994, pp. 61-2.
24. Harrison 1978, p. 39.



David Germano
translated into English.25 One of the most pressing issues in the text is the basis for differentiation of
Mahāyāna Buddhism into two separate strands: the Pāramitā vehicle and the Mantra vehicle (i.e. tantra, or
Vajrayana). Tsongkhapa locates the key difference in the realm of "method,"26 which in Buddhist tantra he
explains as "Mantra's deity yoga-meditation on oneself as having an aspect similar to a form body."7 He
subsequently expands this to include the divine residence under the rubric of the "mandala circle"28 and
explains that is the main method for a practitioner achieving the Form Body (rupakāya) of a Buddha. Cozort
elaborates on this method as the yoga which causes the mind that directly (non-conceptually) realizes
emptiness to appear in the form of a deity such as a Buddha."29 This appearance of the mind eventually
develops into Buddha's Form Body;30 the mind develops into the dharma-kāya. Its extraordinary
accomplishment is that it is a method of "uniting wisdom and method in which wisdom and method are
joined together in a single consciousness":21 in the simplest terms, you integrate meditation on a deity and
on emptiness - "if one mediates both on a deity and on emptiness, it is the quick path."32
Tsongkhapa goes on to attempt to substantiate this by showing that the practice of deity yoga extends
back to the "lowest" (and by extension in our own historical reading of these materials, earliest) strata of
Buddhist tantra: the materials later codified as Kriyā and Carya tantras. He fails, however, to address the
presence of non-tantric prototypes for such practice in clearly defined Buddha-encounter scripts or practices
cited in the early Mahayana and even pre-Mahāyāna materials. In addition to the discrete details of locating
this practice of visualizing and emotionally identifying one's own body-image with that of a Buddha, his
broader point appears to be that tantra integrates the perception of emptiness with vivid visions of intense,
fluid and divine forms, thus thinking, and experiencing, together emptiness and form, or process and
structure, in a dynamic integrated manner. It is this contemplative ability to integrate two poles, that
otherwise tend to diverge from each other, that is so distinctive and powerful in tantric practice, and for
Tsongkhapa at least, it is the visualization of self as Buddha primarily at the surface of one's own body that
captures this dynamic in all distinctively tantric contemplation.
It should be noted that in the context of later tantras, namely the Anuttarayoga tantras, he expands the
rubric "deity yoga" to refer to "perfection phase" practices as well, but even with that expanded
significance of the term embracing visualizing the body's interior as similar in form to a Buddha's, my
comments below still pertain. In this broader sense of deity yoga embracing both generation and perfection
phase techniques belonging to Anuttarayoga tantra cycles, the term continues to be focused on the
generation of a bodily self-image in the specific visual form of a Buddha or Bodhisattva. The rationale for
including perfection phase techniques seems to be fourfold: (i) the generated self-visualization continues to
be maintained throughout the subtle body practices, (ii) the subtle body practices themselves aim at
penetrating deeper into the embodied energy to flesh out and actualize the surface body image's
transmutation. (iii) some experiences derive from previous visualization of deities even though the deities
25. Hopkins 1987 and 1987a.
26. See Hopkins 1987a, pp. 113-116, where Tsongkhapa initially presents his view of the correct basis for
differentiating Mahāyāna into two distinct traditions; also see p. 132 and elsewhere. He understands these two as
possessing the same view, but differing on this issue of method, pp. 133-134.
27. Hopkins 1987a, p. 116.
28. Hopkins 1987, p. 119.
29. Cozort 1986, p. 24.
30. Cozort 1986, p. 27.
31. Cozort 1986, p. 26.
32. Hopkins 1987a, p. 129. In addition to this integration of divine form and emptiness, in later tantric movements in
particular, a key is the utilization of an intensely blissful mind to realize emptiness (see Cozort 1986, p. 78).
33. Hopkins 1987a, pp. 121-122 and 129-138. The controversy as to whether Kriya and Carya tantras in fact involve
"self-generation and entry of a wisdom-being" is directly addressed in Hopkins 1987, pp. 47-62.
34. Hopkins 1987, p. 122.
35. Cozort 1986, p. 65.



The Shifting Terrain of the Tantric Bodies
57
may not appear at that point, and (iii) the dissolutions of embodied energy into the heart's radiant light
sparked by these manipulations ultimately issue forth in one's fundamental wind currents naturally re-
materializing in the shimmering form of the deity's bodily image, which is now called the "illusory body"
(sgyu lus, māyādeha) in contrast to the coarse material body.? For these reasons, in Tsongkhapa's view
perfection phase praxis should be seen as an extension of the self-generation of oneself in the aspect of the
deity: the generation phase initiates the imaginative process of transformation of one's own mind and body
into that of a Buddha, while the perfection phase renders the imagination into a reality. Deity yoga remains
principally the transformation of one's own bodily image for that of the Buddha, as conjoined with the
concomitant transformation of one's mind.
Although the broader rubric of two polarities might be suitable as an umbrella embracing much of later
tantra, the narrower rubric of deity yoga that Tsongkhapa, as well as recent academic scholarship, so
forcefully highlights is problematic as the central and invariable defining characteristic of Buddhist tantra.
Tsongkhapa focuses on the debatable presence of such praxis in early or "lower" tantric traditions, where at
times it seems the encounter scenario alone was present without any clear indication of a principle of
identification. However, in the present context I would rather look at the validity of this deity-yoga centric
approach for understanding later tantric movements, which at least from their own perspective, are also
higher. In other words, as I will discuss below, it can be clearly shown that some late tantric developments
did not involve the practice of deity yoga and thus fall outside of Tsongkhapa's normative definition of
Buddhist tantra. I should stress that Tsongkhapa's position is a very well argued one with considerable
support in the Indian literature itself and was clearly at least one orthodox position in Indian circles in its
general parameters. While these movements by their own admission often placed themselves into a third
category threatening to transcend the dialectic between sūtra and tantra all together, this attempt to articulate
a third doxographical space never really succeeded. Thus it is most natural to discuss these in the context of
tantra, a context to which they most manifestly belong in almost every aspect, even if at times they stretch
the paradigmatic boundaries within which normative scholarship tends to contain tantric discourse and
practice. We will return to this issue below.
While early tantric developments focusing on encounters, and later embodying, of Buddhas and their
surrounding ideal cultures can thus be seen to be growing as, and out of, one of the main streams of
Mahāyāna Buddhism, it should be noted that the nature of these scenarios undergoes a gradual shift that in
retrospect constitutes a striking transformation. It is these transformations that constitute the real break away
identity of these strands of Mahayana as constituting an independent movement which raises serious
questions as to its relationship to those other elements of Mahāyāna with which it once seemed to belong to
a clear continuum. In brief, I would summarize this as on the one hand, (i) the displacement of the blissful
36. Cozort 1986, p. 78.
37. Eventually in the perfection phase meditations (Cozort 1986, p. 65), the visualization is said in some sources to be
replaced by the subtle mind of radiant light itself meditating on emptiness, while its correlate subtle wind directly
manifests in the deity's form as an "illusory body" (sgyu lus). The illusory body (pp. 94 ff.) is the "actual
achievement of a divine body adorned with the major and minor marks" resulting from the metaphoric clear light
and the fundamental wind that is its mount acting in conjunction. Out of the contemplative dissolution of all winds
into the heart's indestructible nucleus (p. 98), this fluid energy re-materializes as channeled by the pattern set up via
previous visualization into the fluid shimmering form of the deity. It is called "impure" (p. 95), since the practitioner
has not yet completely eradicated the emotional distortions (nyon grib), while that appearance becomes "pure"
following liberation. This pre-liberation process of the coarse material body ceasing as the fundamental mind
naturally emerges in an illusory body is said to be analogous to how an intermediate state body re-manifests after
death or a dream body after falling asleep (pp. 100-101). One can depart from, and re-enter, the coarse body in this
stage of realization of the illusory body, since the coarse body is only completely destroyed with the total
eradication of karmic energy that transpires when a pure illusory body is attained.
38. Cozort 1986, p. 27.
39. For example, see Snellgrove 1988, p. 1359 and Newman 1987, p. 24.



David Germano
serenity of pure land culture for the violent dynamics of cremation ground culture, or the intense intimacy
and blissfulness of the swinging sexualized sixties; while on the other hand, (ii) the ancient yet intermittent
Buddhist intensification of rhetorical negation not only resurfaces in this context as a defining mark of
tantra, but actually becomes radicalized into lifestyle negation with its ethics of active transgression. The
former point is simple in its outlines: the central figures of the mandala encounter and deity yoga
appropriation shift from serene Buddhas to male and female figures in varying postures of explicit sexual
intercourse, as well as horrific figures garlanded with the skulls of children, drinking blood, and stomping
on the corpses or devastated bodies of other beings, the famous Heruka." Along with the shift of the center,
the entire cultural milieu also shifts, as the total mandala gestalt becomes either an iconographic orgy of
sexual expression, or the representation of a terrifying cremation grounds culture of demons, dākiņīs,
corpses, cannibalism and the like. The contrast to the serene peaceful landscape of early Mahāyāna pure
lands, with their optimal teaching scenarios and idyllic features, should be obvious. Not everyone found
themselves at home with this new version of the Buddha encounter, with its sexualized and horrific variants
of the culture a Buddha emanates outwards, the converse, of course, is also true - it is far from clear that
then, or now, everyone found themselves comfortable in the politically correct and oh so regulated world of
the early pure lands. While certainly Buddhist proto-tantra and early tantra had been re-absorbing
tremendous amounts of ritual processes from other Indian religious traditions from an early point, this new
twist apparently involved a much more controversial incorporation and adaptation of specifically Saivite
images and ideologies, which seemed to push Buddhist tantra right beyond the pale in some Buddhist eyes.
The intensified controversy seems to have derived from three elements in particular: the central
soteriological importance of these adapted images, the striking differences they posed to the displaced
Buddhist images with their valorization of iconographically and linguistically portrayed sex and violence,
and the threat they seemed to pose to the regulated and celibate lifestyle of Buddhist monastic life.
Finally, hand in hand with this change in cultures, we find that tantra becomes marked by a very
distinctive deconstructive rhetoric, which itself in part acted to magnify the controversial aspects of these
new developments. In general, in early Mahāyāna the pure land cults and the intensely negative rhetoric of
the Prajñāpāramitā seem to have kept their distance from each other, one offering paradisiacal realms and
the other an austere vision of emptiness (sünyatā), though there were attempts to bridge the distance.43
Similarly, the earliest forms of tantra do not appear to have highlighted deconstructive language. However,
with these changes to sexual and horrific iconography, we find that tantra as a discourse and practice
increasingly not only incorporates such language, but radicalizes it into a distinctive and controversial style.
In addition to rhetorically dismissing or devaluing much of conventional Buddhist practice and beliefs, the
horrific imagery to some degree deconstructs the previous Buddhist proclivity for serene Buddhas and
Bodhisattvas, while ethically a practitioner was called to actually deconstruct conventional values and
conduct through a transgressive lifestyle. This thus went considerably beyond simply integrating
conventional Mahāyāna ideologies of emptiness into a tantric field. In addition to this transgressive brand of
deconstructive negation, as we shall see, an equally important variant of tantric negative rhetoric was to
emerge in what we might term the naturalistic negation of such movements as Mahamudrā or Atiyoga.
Emphasizing a passive letting-go rather than acts of violent transgression, and a rhetoric of natural
spontaneity rather than superhuman feats of control and manipulation, this latter style of tantra gave rise to
a movement that claimed to go beyond deity yoga-defined tantra into new fields of play.
40. This latter point is elaborated on in Germano 1997.
41. For this historical process of sexualization and horrification, see Snellgrove 1987. pp. 278-303 and 134.141, 152-
160, 198. Among other things, he associates the former with a change from a fivefold concept of Buddhahood to a
twofold one, and the latter with the rise to mandala dominance of the wrathful Vajra family with Aksobhya as its
nominal head.
42. See Snellgrove 1987, pp. 152-216 and Sanderson 1985, p. 214



The Shifting Terrain of the Tantric Bodies
The worlds within: subtle bodies
This tantric focus on encountering and identifying with the Buddha primarily though his surface body-image
at some point in the history of Buddhist tantra was transformed with a radical reorientation towards the
body's interior, the peri-personal space. Thus, in addition to the key tantric yogic technology of identity
transference in deity yoga via visual transformation of the practitioner's body image, we find the
development of a second crucial tantric yogic process: manipulations of a subtle body physiology often in
conjunction with sexual yoga. With this statement, however, I must make two immediate caveats.
Firstly, it is true that previous Buddhist practice involved various types of attention paid to the interior
of the body, such as early contemplative focus on the movements of breath as well as cultivated observation
of ordinarily occurring physiological sensations within the body. In these practices of mindfulness and
vipaśyanā, then, there is a cultivation of a sense of the body's interior. However, this interior of the body was
seen as a container not for other bodies, and certainly not for the divine bodies of the Buddha, but rather as
literally a "sack of shit" with its assorted repugnant substances.
More importantly, early "tantric" practices included limited contemplative extensions into the body's
interior, as described clearly in Tsongkhapa's account of Kriyā and Carya Yoga tantric practices. These
include visualizing a variety of interrelated phenomena at the deity's heart, whether the deity is visualized
in front or as the deity's own body image: a lunar disc, 46 the letters of the deity's mantras appearing around
the lunar disc's edge," light emanating out from these letters, a flame resounding with the mantra's
sounds, and a smaller divine body image within the heart's flames. All of these visual and sonic
evocations within the body are centered on the presence of the mantra in the process of deity-visualization;
this is of course related to the visualization itself often beginning with a seed syllable emanating light that
transforms into the deity's body. The mantra lies at the heart of the deity's body as a type of sonic essence
emanating out the deity's bodily form as well as representing its dynamic activity. The practice involves
initially verbally reciting the mantra located within the heart, and then using the flame, body, letters and disc
at the heart to move towards the mantra's self-reverberation unaided by verbal recitation. Thus it is summed
up as "moon, letters, sounds, "52 while the fire is a cool, lunar flame in striking opposition to the solar flame
that later comes to dominate the tantric body's interior, Finally, these practices also involve a very limited
form of wind yoga, which is explained as holding the winds while focusing on the divine body image. The
rationale is to withdraw the mind inside from its ordinary overly stimulated state of distraction and cathexis
to external objects:54 like the visualizations above, it thus helps to generate samatha so that the mind can
focus one pointedly on the appropriate contemplative object in sustained fashion. This is, of course, due to
the breath and its extended meaning being thought of as intimately involved with the state of thought
activity. In terms of the actual practice, it is probably similar to how a contemporary Tibetan exegete, Geshe
43. Harrison 1978, p. 40.
44. I follow Snellgrove 1987, p. 233 in seeing this term as applying to these practices only retroactively, since in fact
they appear to originally constitute the primarily ritual side of non-esoteric Mahayana Buddhism: "... those ritual
works known later as Action and Performance tantras were originally the main ritual texts which formed part of
Mahayana religious practice at a time when later tantras were unknown. The term kriya ... simply means a rite of
any kind, Carya ... also means a rite of any kind."
45. Hopkins 1987.
46. Hopkins 1987, p. 141
47. Hopkins 1987, p. 144.
48. Hopkins 1987, p. 146.
49. Hopkins 1987, p. 1957.
50. Hopkins 1987, p. 159.
51. Hopkins 1987, pp. 194, 197
52. Hopkins 1987, p. 197.
53. Hopkins 1987, p. 113.
54. Hopkins 1987, pp. 157-8.



David Germano
Kelsang Gyatso, explains it in his Tantric Grounds and Paths: the practitioner imaginatively gathers the
winds, or currents of energy, in from the nine bodily gateways and skin pores through which they ordinarily
ceaselessly pass in and out, so that they dissolve into the lunar disc at the heart. Holding the breath, attention
is then focused therein.
As we shall see below, this limited attention to the body's interiority is strikingly different from the later
developments that are the subject of this paper, though certainly it appears to be an important precursor.
Despite the limited importance of wind yoga, it involves no discussions of channels in the body, through
which substances are moved, or in general any version of subtle physiology which was to later become so
important. The body is not thus being mapped out or explored in any systematic way; and the limited
attention paid to the body's interior is done so in a way closely linked to the body surface visualization, such
that it is largely reducible to the deity's mantra. This appears linked to the relationship of mantra and deity
as a signifier and signified, the mantra and the deity it expresses. In standard generation phase visualization,
this relationship is especially clear in the imaginative construction of the deity's body out of its seed syllable.
We thus have the sequence of emptiness, vibratory sound and body image, with the extended mantric
sequence reinscribed within the body image as a locus from which emanating activity stems. This clearly
expresses the paradigm that the body's interiority hides what is most true or real, and may also represent a
ritual counterpart to early Buddha-nature speculation. In other words, the Buddha as an indwelling presence
at the heart is the ultimate agent within each individual's own existence, which it creates and sustains, even
if it is then obscured within the folds of its derivatives. Of course the identity of that internal Buddha agent
is a crucial and often quite obscure question. In the present context, I would like to note that the presence is
largely construed as linguistic in nature, is centered within the heart and is focused on visual and aural
phenomenon. This strikingly contrasts to the subsequent focus on vivid tactile sensations of bliss, heat and
movement within the body, as well as the focus on a vertical axis of movement stretching from the genitals
to the head via the heart.
With the advent of Yoga tantras, we might expect to find a greater turn towards the body's interior,
given that it is often described as a turn away from external ritual towards internal contemplative processes.
However, a quick reading of the presentation of Yoga tantra in Tsongkhapa's The Great Stages of Mantra
and his disciple Khedrub Je's (mKhas grub rje, 1385-1438) A General Presentation of the Classes of
Tantra - both of which I consider excellent Indological works, though of course they have their own
agendas - reveals the same limited types of activities within the body's interior. Of note in particular is a
technique for stabilizing the mind after deity yoga, which involves contemplating a tiny vajra at the nose's
tip. According to Tsongkhapa, some sources say the vajra's visualization is originally at the navel or heart,
and is drawn up to the nose with the breath's movements; he also mentions tactile sensations associated with
bliss in this context. At one point tiny vajras then pervade the entire body, as well as increasing in size so
that they are emanated outwards and contracted back to the nose's tip. In addition, Khedrub Je mentions a
moon at the heart supporting a five pronged vajra and most interestingly refers to a syllable which becomes
an eight-petalled lotus at the deity's throat."
The second caveat relates to issues raised by the possibility of much earlier occurrences of classic subtle
body ideology and praxis in Buddhist circles. It is certainly conceivable that there were limited occurrences
of this as an oral tradition of an alternative mode of practice, but even so, it is a moment of critical
importance when these practices and ideologies become graphically inscribed in complex textual traditions.
Not only does it indicate how central these practices have become at that point, but also that they have
become mainstream (at least in some circles) ways in which Buddhist discourse is pursued. In other words,
they not only occur in Buddhist texts, they also become themselves a new medium for pursuing Buddhist
55. Gyatso 1995, p. 33.
56. See Wayman 1980 for an edition of the Tibetan text with a preliminary translation
57. Wayman 1980, p. 243,
58. Hopkins 1992, pp. 218-219. I am indebted to Jeffrey Hopkins for pointing out this passage to me.



The Shifting Terrain of the Tantric Bodies
textualized discourses. That I do not thereby reduce the subtle body in Buddhist tantra to a passive medium
for such "inscription" should be clear from my discussion below, but it needs to be emphasized that this an
important aspect.
With these two caveats in place, we are now ready to briefly look at the nature of this radical
reorientation towards the body's interior which occurs in the new literature eventually grouped together and
classified as the Anuttarayoga tantras. Most strikingly, in this literature we find the rise of an alternative
body within the coarse body, a body with subtle physiology consisting of channels (rtsa, nādi), winds (rlung,
prāna) and nuclei (thig le, bindu). Thus there is no longer simply a focus on the heart, but rather a central
axis is set up that not only includes the navel and genitals, but also the head area. While the genital zone is
of course notorious for its erotic dimensions, it should be noted that not only do the sexual nuclei flow from
the head area, but also many techniques based on the expanded subtle body center around the head zone. It
is often said that physical pliancy (shin sbyangs, praśrabdhi) can be generated anywhere in the body through
the exoteric practice of calming (zhi gnas, samatha), with the notable exception of the brain, which is thus
relatively "heavier" than other parts of the body. The contemporary scholar Geshe Gedün Lodro has
speculated that the reason for this may be that a preponderance of the original paternal semen and maternal
blood is concentrated in the head, with which the most fundamental psychic energy is associated. It is thus
only the radical techniques of tantra which work directly with these nuclei that can actually generate
physical and mental pliancy in these areas. For the time being, I merely cite this interesting comment
because it reflects that tantra is at least as concerned with the region of the head as it is with the genitals,
despite popular misconceptions
With this network of energy and substance flow patterns in the body, complicated new contemplative
systems are articulated that manipulate these flows in ways conducive to the generation of unusual
sensations and contemplative states understood to eventually culminate in a reiteration of the enlightenment
experience. I think it is useful to differentiate between two different basic paradigms of these interior
contemplations focused on this body within a body, though at this point I cannot offer a historical analysis
of possibly separate modes of genesis. On the one hand, we find a highly sexualized paradigm explicitly
modeled on sexual sensations in many cases to the point of explicitly relying on actual sexual intercourse).
This paradigm focuses on the movement of nuclei" (semen is its coarser aspect), especially in their dripping
from their lunar reservoir at the crown's thousand-petalled lotus down towards the genitals. The most well
known instance of this is Hail Vajra Tantra's (Hevajra Tantra) account of the Fierce Woman (gtum mo,
candali) practice. In brief, it involves a solar fire blazing up from the abdominal area to melt the ambrosial
lunar reservoir, the downward progress of which through the cakras ignites a cascading series of ever
intensifying sensations of bliss (graded into "four joys"); the practice can be done in conjunction with actual
sexual intercourse or not. On the other hand, we find in The Esoteric Assembly Tantra (Guhyasamāja Tantra)
exegetical literature a death-based paradigm which contemplatively mimics the dissolution of consciousness
that occurs in dying and falling asleep. This highlights the body's central channel into which its winds
sequentially dissolve, sparking a cascading series of altered states of consciousness accompanied by shifting
experiences of light culminating in the ultimate dissolution into the heart's radiant light ('od gsal,
prabhäsvara). In this way, exegetical literature reinscribes these techniques and experiences into a deity
yoga framework, since out of this immersion into radiant light, the divine body-as-self is understood to now
inexorably re-emerge in a much more potent form than the previously fabricated visualization. In short, the
practitioner's own fundamental winds now stir from the heart in the form of the deity, which is referred to
as the "illusory body" (sgyu lus, māyādeha).
Both contemplative paradigms for the subtle body, which are often found integrated together, share a
tendency towards a rhetoric of control and manipulation, as the body's internal currents and substances are
moved around in line with the mind's agenda. In addition, we can discern a very strong focus on interiority,
59. It should be noted that in later practice these two paradigms are integrated with each other and their possible distinct
origins require further historical analysis.



David Germano
since all of these processes are taking place during extended sequences within the practitioner's most
intimate peri-personal spaces. Thus we can see this in some sense as an extension of a directionality that
begins in the pure encounter scenarios of early Mahāyāna contemplation and ritual, where the Buddha is
either evoked or appears in the lived space of the practitioner. When the encounter shifts to identification
and transference, most strikingly in the Yoga tantra literature, we can begin to discern a pattern by which the
Buddha comes ever closer, moving inwards from the exterior. This movement is then continued further into
the body's intimate cavernous hollows in subtle body praxis, where the identification is radicalized and the
encounter events take place primarily within the practitioner's body, not in front or on its surface. The
intimacy of this internal inquiry into self-as-buddha, or buddha-as-self, can be linked to the increasing
centrality of sexual imagery and experience, since the sexual act is one of penetrating movement into the
body's interior in more ways than one. We have thus come a long way from the externally performed ritual
that by its very exteriority has interpersonal dimensions to the deeply interiorized private nature of the
perfection phase practices with their focus on manipulatively centering intense experiences within the
body's core.
Bodies in Bodies: phenomenology or text?
These practices begin to ritually establish not simply the presence of the Buddha, but also Buddhism's
presence within the individual's body. It thus remains an open question as to the degree that this gradual
interiorization functions to appropriate the unrestrained creative authority of a Buddha to the individual, or
instead largely functions to appropriate the individual with body to the restrained and structured authority of
a Buddhist discourse. This dialectical tension emerges in the Anuttarayoga tantra materials with the
reconstruction of a Buddhist universe mapped out on the body's interior, along with close concern with
strong emotionally laden sensations originating within the body's interior that do not have specifically
Buddhist valences, as much as Buddhist tantra at times attempts to render them self-interpreting in a
Buddhist voice (such as labeling semen bodhicitta). Snellgrove has argued that specifically tantric exegetical
work only fully comes into its own at the level of the Anuttarayoga tantras, since the earlier texts were
relatively clear without secondary commentary and were dependent on normative Mahāyāna sutras in
general for framing intellectual speculation. Subsequently a vast body of tantra exegetical work developed
since the primary texts not only now covered a wide range of materials no longer focused on mere ritual
explication, but were also laden with interpretative problems due to the humor, shock rhetoric, coded
language, and hermetic nature of its philosophical style's dependence on stylistic and linguistic plays.
I would add to this that descriptions and experiences relating to the subtle body thus became situated
in a complex web of textualized discourses, in addition to itself constituting an alternative medium in which
such discourses could be articulated. For this reason, it is naive to think these practices and discourses of the
subtle body only refer to internal experiences that are closely linked to physiological sensations or even the
development of reflexivity in the human nervous system. While this is undeniably an important aspect of
these practices, it is also clear these bodies within the body were a contested zone between different
tendencies in Buddhism itself. What I have in mind here are two phenomena: (i) competing Buddhist ways
of representing dimensions and events in the subtle body that reflect tensions between different styles of
tantric Buddhism; and (ii) a more global phenomena of the attempt in some sense to colonize the
intrinsically non-denominational interior of the body and its vivid sensations with specifically Buddhist
images, values and structures that reflect particular agendas and belief systems. Thus with the rise of the cult
of the human body, particularly in its sexualized aspect, the body's interior becomes a key site in which the
overall destiny of Buddhism gets played out, as well as the soteriological destiny of individual Buddhists.
I would like to tentatively suggest that the early location of the mantra within the body's
interior - the signifier that literally embodies itself as that which it signifies - represents a preliminary
Buddhist colonization of the body's interior. The mantra is the sonic essence of the Buddha image, while the
60. Snellgrove 1987, p. 270.



The Shifting Terrain of the Tantric Bodies
63
Buddha image itself is in many ways a visual encoding of normative Buddhist ideologies and symbols. The
latter is clearly represented in the third of the three principles said to govern all generation phase praxis:
vivid visualization (gsal snang), divine pride (Iha'i nga rgyal) and keeping the image's) purity in mind (dag
dran). The latter refers to the critical importance of keeping in mind the philosophical significance of each
visual detail of the image, which thus comes to be a type of iconic allegory in formation. While the vivid
tactile sensations of later subtle body practice partially disrupt the intrusion of Buddhist discourse into the
body's interior, it also remains true that simultaneously an extensive mapping out of the body was taking
place in terms of mantric particles, deity images and recapitulation of psycho-cosmogony. Thus we could
perhaps suggest a certain agonistic element in the body's interior, where we find a dialectical tension
between the corpus of Buddhist discourse inscribed on the body's passive medium, and the active lived
bodies of Buddhist practitioners asserting their own peculiarly embodied languages within Buddhist
discourse. Such a tension in non-Buddhist contexts has been described in a variety of recent studies, such as
Thomas Csordas's Embodiment and Experience, where he contrasts the body as an object as for
contemporary technological medicine and conventional biological science to the body as the subject of
sensation, experience and world.62 This is further related to the body as a passive text or matrix on which
social reality and mental representations are inscribed that are amenable to semiotic analysis, in contrast to
the body as an active subject which primordially and creatively participates in human culture in ways
demanding phenomenological inquiry. I believe a variant of this tension was a central one in late Indian and
early Tibetan Buddhism contemplative attention to the body's interiorities and exteriorities, and not simply
a contemporary debate projected back into a distorted past. I will briefly return to this suggestion at the
paper's end.
PART 2: BUDDHAS, SKIES AND INTER-SUBJECTIVE BODIES IN ATIYOGA
COSMOGONY AND CONTEMPLATION
Skies as self
The specific subject of my paper is the transformations of these tantric paradigms and directions effected by
the Seminal Heart (snying thig) tradition of the Great Perfection (rdzogs chen). I will focus my comments
and citations on the tradition's original corpus of eleventh century revelations (claiming to be eighth century
translations of non-Tibetan originals) that came to be redacted as The Seventeen Tantras. This formed the
basis of a set of twelfth century Tibetan revelations largely attributed to eighth century Indian figures, which
came to be codified as The Seminal Heart of Vimalamitra:64 these both in turn formed the basis for the
61. Beyer 1973, pp. 80-81.
62. Csordas 1994, p. 8. See Thomas Csordas's introduction to his Embodiment and Experience (Csordas 1994, pp.
1-24) for an account of this debate within anthropological circles. I am grateful to David Need for drawing my
attention to this article.
63. Newman dates The Wheel of Time Tantra's formal redaction to 1012 following possible low profile preliminary
forms (see Newman 1985. p. 65). The Seminal Heart tradition itself dates its inception to India prior to the ninth
century, though its emergence into the open only occurs in the eleventh century as revealed Tibetan-language
"treasure" texts (gter ma) in Tibet. I have argued elsewhere (Germano 1994) that The Seventeen Tantras were
largely composed in their present forms by Tibetans in the eleventh century, though literary, oral and practical roots
may stretch back much earlier with possible links to India, Central Asia and China. Since there was tremendous
contact between Northern India and Tibet right through this time period, the question of historical points of
connection remains open. While the tradition has often been accused of being quite un-Buddhist, in fact it can be
shown that it belongs firmly to the continuum of Buddhist discourses and practices of its time outside of Tibet.
However questions of possible direct influences by Chinese Taoism and so forth, particularly in its distinctive
contemplation of light images and intricate cosmogonic discourses, remain.
64. As discussed at length in Germano 1994 and Germano (unpublished), this literature also claims to date to the eighth
century. However, I argue that its formal composition took place largely in the twelfth century, with particular
elements deriving from possibly earlier sources (see above).



64
David Germano
tradition's next major literary developments, namely the fourteenth century The Seminal Heart of the Sky
Dancer attributed to Padmasambhava and the indigenous corpus of Longchenpa (klong chen rab 'byams
pa, 1308-1363). The tradition's highly original syncretic innovations proved to be highly influential in Tibet,
and in particular came to dominate the Atiyoga tradition. I will argue that in its contemplative practice and
associated discourses it overturned what were arguably the two defining features of classic Buddhist tantra
in India, at least as represented by the Anuttarayoga tantras: (i) the practice of deity yoga as a prescribed
visualization of one's own body image as that of a Buddha and (ii) the cult of the subtle body with its tones
of manipulation and deep interiorization of the soteriological drama.
In order to understand this transformation, we must briefly outline the nature of contemplative praxis
in this tradition. While the tradition integrated a wide variety of classic perfection phase techniques into its
path structure as ancillary or preliminary contemplations, it leaves practically no space at all for classical
deity yoga visualizations. Later fourteenth century collections do generally include sädhanas as well as
standard preliminary practices such as Vajrasattva meditation or Guru Yoga, but their structural position in
the overall system remains generally peripheral. Its two central contemplative systems are unique to the
tradition and initially appear to be quite different from normative deity yoga or subtle body techniques: the
practice and associated preliminaries for the breakthrough (khregs chod) and direct transcendence (thod
rgal) respectively. The former is framed by radically deconstructive rhetoric which positions Prajñāpāramitā-
style contemplation of emptiness within a tantric discursive field emphasizing letting go and spontaneity. In
its main practice, it is thus devoid of analytical styles of deconstruction and focuses instead on the natural
flow of appearances that fill one's field of experience when intellectual attempts at control and manipulation
are surrendered. It is the second practice, however, that is crucial in the current context. In short, this practice
involves using light sources (a sun, moon or lamp), or a specially prepared completely dark retreat room, in
order to generate spontaneous flows of light imagery, which of their own accord gradually begin to take
shape in the external field of the practitioner's vision as mandalas of Buddhas. These mandalas gradually
take the shape of the set of "one hundred peaceful and wrathful deities" found in The Nucleus of Mystery
Tantra (Guhyagarbha Tantra) in four visionary phases (snang ba bzhi). The first three phases involve the
light images increasing in complexity, extent and pattern, while the fourth phase entails the dissolution of
all images into the state of non-manifest enlightenment (termed "swirling into the single expanse"). The
following passage from The Tantra of Unimpeded Sound is a terse description of how this imaginal process
unfolds and refolds in four phases: 66
(1) The vision of reality's immediacy
Emerges through the gateway of the (visual) faculties,
And it is thus radiant within the cloudless sky.
(ii) In the intensifying manifestation of experiences (vision)
The colors of primordial gnoses are brought forth externally,
And thus shine within the objective sphere of coarse appearances
In vertical lines and horizontal beams of light,
Nuclei, and the various Bodies of Buddhas within them.
(iii) The vision of awareness' optimization:
From out of the indeterminate rainbow colors
Shining in the Enjoyment Body's characteristics and exemplary forms,
The five spiritual families manifest in terms of the Father-Mother consort pairs.
65. As I argue in Germano (unpublished), it would appear clear that this text as a composition in no way dates back to
Padmasambhava as a historical figure or even earlier than its fourteenth century "discovery" in Tibet. However, it
does represent an important linkage of the Seminal Heart tradition to the increasingly central cult of
Padmasambhava in Tibet.
66. Ab vol. 1. 193. ff. Since there are almost no translations into English of these materials, I have chosen to give
several lengthy citations to give readers a sense of the text's self-presentation



The Shifting Terrain of the Tantric Bodies
(iv) In this vision of exhaustion within reality
The manifestation of meditative experiences is emptied out,
And thus your body is exhausted and sensory objects as well become exhausted;
Having become free from the distorting host of notions,
You are beyond words operating as the basis for expression
The important facets of this practice are that (i) there is no prescribed visualization that alters or controls the
flow of spontaneous light imagery; (ii) there is never any suggestion that the practitioner manipulate this
flow of imagery so as to direct it towards a transformation of his or her own body image into that of the
deity; (iii) there is no manipulation of winds and substances within the subtle body's conduits inside the
body of which these images are derivative; and (iv) the visions climax in the entire external sky being
pervaded with mandalas of Buddhas, at which point it all fades away into the final enlightenment, which is
itself an absence.
Parallels in the dark
Before proceeding to talk about the metaphysiology and cosmogony that underlie these contemplative
processes, I would like to briefly discuss the different settings for this practice in light of possible parallels
to The Wheel of Time Tantra (Kālacakra Tantra). The practice itself comes to be known as "direct
transcendence" (thod rgal, vyutkrānta/ka), vyutkartaka, avaskandalka) or viskandaka), a term which is
attested in at least five of The Seventeen Tantras.67 It occurs in almost identical form in Great Perfection texts
belonging to the Tibetan Bonpo tradition, a religious tradition deeply immersed in Buddhist discourses and
practices yet maintaining a very distinctive non-Buddhist historiographical tradition of its origins, as well as
an unusually wide formal incorporation of "popular" traditions. One such Bonpo text, namely The
Experiential Transmission of Drug yelwa attributed to Drugyelwa (Bru rje rgyal ba g.yung drung, 12422-
1290?), gives a particularly clear threefold division of the settings in which these light visions can be
practiced: gazing within a specially prepared dark room, gazing at the daytime sky with one's back to the
sun, and gazing indirectly at the sun's rays. The text makes clear that these three are considered as
sequential phases, with progression to be done only when one has mastered the previous phase.?
Subsequently Drugyelwa describes the sun gazing as an "enhancing technique" (bogs 'don thabs) to be used
only briefly and occasionally, since practicing it constantly can upset the body. In The Seventeen Tantras,
however, it would seem the emphasis is instead on sun-gazing and in fact I have been unable to locate even
one unambiguous reference to a dark retreat (mun mtshams); however, it is discussed explicitly in The
Seminal Heart of Vimalamitra and in at least the fourteenth century we find the conjunction of the rubrics
"sky yoga" and "dark retreat" in Longchenpa's The Treasury of Words and Meanings.
67. The Tantra of the Pointing Out Introduction, The Six Spaces Tantra, The Garland of Precious Pearls Tantra, The
Tantra of Overflowing Preciousness, and The Self-Emerging Perfection Tantra.
68. The correspondences between the two traditions go right down to the terminological details, such that there can be
no doubt they share a common genesis. The current state of research does not allow for accurate dating of early
Bonpo texts, thus inhibiting comparative studies.
69. See pp. 617.3-621.1, 621.3-624.5 and 624.5 ff. respectively. Also see Levin 1988 for a contemporary
phenomenological diary of a dark retreat.
70. Pp. 621.6 and 625.1.
71. P. 628.5.
72. Relevant word searches (mun khang, mun mishams, rgya mtsho ar gtad, rgya mtsholi rnal sbyor) turned up
nothing in The Seventeen Tantras, and Longchenpa's commentarial works lack any clear citations of these tantras
on this issue. The tantras instead have basically two types of passages which Longchenpa, at least, attempts to
explicate as involving the dark retreat in his brief discussion in The Treasury of Words and Meanings (pp. 282.6-
285.1). The first type involves applying pressure to the eyes or neck to stimulate visions of concentric lights termed
"nuclei" (thig le, bindu) which tend to initially be reddish (see The Tantra of Unimpeded Sound. pp. 131-2, and The
Blazing Lamp Tantra, p. 305). However, none of the relevant passages mention anything at all about darkness, and



David Germano
At any rate, the point of this digression in the current context is that The Wheel of Time Tantra tradition
has a similar nomenclature in its division of practice into "night-time and day-time yogas." The night-time
yoga," also termed "the yoga of space," can be done in a special dark room74 and involves to a limited
degree spontaneous imagery. These images reflect the dissolution of winds into the central channel and are
codified into a set of ten signs (rtags bcu) that are an extension of The Esoteric Assembly Tantra's classic
series of eight visual manifestations occurring within perfection phase praxis. Divided up into four night and
six daytime signs, they resemble the following visual phenomena: smoke, mirage, fireflies, a butter lamp's
flame, the planet Kālāgni (like the sun or destructive fire at the end of a great aeon), the sun, moon, a dark
eclipse (rāhu), lightening and a blue nucleus. An eleventh and culminating sign is the appearance of the deity
Wheel of Time and consort Visvamātā within that blue nucleus, similar to the appearance of deity images
within nuclei in direct transcendence practice. These eleven signs are then stabilized by further practice.76
However, the central practices utilize extensive visualization and classic perfection phase techniques that are
focused on the body's interior. The daytime yoga, on the other hand, is done outside with one's back to the
sun. However, it involves similar contemplative techniques focusing on visualization and the body's
interior. While the two sets of practices thus differ in detail, the strikingly similar nomenclature of
"darkness" and the "sky," the practice of contemplation in a specially prepared dark interior, and the
valorization of non-visualized Buddha images raises the question of possible interaction between the two
systems in or out of Tibet.
associated word searches turn up no other references to such techniques. The setting in the tantras themselves
suggests instead that these pressing techniques are simply used to introduce a practitioner to the presence and reality
of the visions of divine light upon which the central practice of direct transcendence (thod rgal) is based
The second set of passages (The Six Spaces Tantra, p. 209) specifically deal with a yoga of the "four times" that
involves manipulation of luminous nuclei in the dark. However there is no reference to it as being part of a practice
with any of the names later associated with the dark retreat, and it is not presented as culminating in deity images
that evolve out of the initial presence of nuclei. That said, it may have been something that was gradually conjoined
with the practice of direct transcendence, if this silence suggests that the initial practice was done outdoors, and that
the dark practices only emerged subsequently in the Seminal Heart. Two other descriptions of the practice by
Longchenpa also fail to cite any relevant scriptural descriptions of the practice (see The Seminal Quintessence of
the Master, vol. 2, pp. 251.4 ff.) and The Seminal Quintessence of the Profound, vol. 1, pp. 257.4 ff.). The first
explicit literary discussion of the practice in the tradition and the source of the standard label for the practice - "the
guidance on darkness which concentrates the ocean (i.e. the eyes)" (rgya misho ar gtad kyi mun khrid) - appears to
be a series of five works classified under the rubric of the "one hundred and fourteenth esoteric precept" in The
Seminal Heart of Vimalamitra (vol. 3, "da," pp. 1-46). The first four texts are attributed to the eight century Indian
Manjusrimitra as translated by Kawa Peltsek (ska ba dpal brtsegs, last half of eighth century) and Vimalamitra,
While the first second and fourth of these texts refer to the pressing technique and frequently to the rubric
"concentration" (ar gtad) with which the dark retreat comes to be identified (a term totally absent from The
Seventeen Tantras themselves), only the third text clearly discusses doing this at nighttime. However, it is only the
fifth text - which lacks any colophon specifying an author - that clearly lays out the entire practice as an "enhancing
technique for direct transcendence." It is unclear to me at this time whether this indicates that the practice itself was
only imported gradually from an alternative Atiyoga lineage such as the yang ti, or whether the obscure references
in The Seventeen Tantras indicate it may have existed as a very secret oral tradition that was only written up
subsequently.
73. Dhargyey 1985. pp. 133-148.
74. Dhargyey 1985, p. 134 and Cozort 1986, p. 124.
75. Dhargyey 1985 and Cozort 1986, p. 125.
76. Cozort 1986, p. 126.
77. Dhargyey 1985, pp. 150-153.
78. Longchenpa's The Wish-Fulfilling Treasury (p. 561.7) refers in an ecumenical fashion to the dark yoga (mun pa'i
rnal 'byor) as practiced by the Anuttarayoga tantra six-limbed yoga (van lag drug gi rnal 'byor, şadangayoga) and
the Seminal Heart, saying that in both the yogic concentration of the five internal winds manifests for the
practitioner in terms of visions of the distorted experiences of the six types of living beings.



The Shifting Terrain of the Tantric Bodies
The heart to eyes connection
The Seminal Heart literature articulates a traditional Buddhist subtle body scheme of three channels, four
cakras and a standard range of winds and nuclei as the background for understanding the dynamics of the
direct transcendence. However, the three channels never form an object of directed contemplative exercises
of any type. In fact, they are largely irrelevant to the practice with one critical exception: an extraordinary
addition to the basic template involving a thin channel of pure light that runs, most importantly, from the
heart up to and out of the two eyes. In general, the basic Buddhist template for the body within a body
consists of three channels termed the "flavor" (ro ma, rasanā), "solitary" (rkyang ma, lalana) and "all-
encompassing" (kun 'dar ma, avadhuti) or "central" (dbus ma) channels, which are located in the torso's
right side, left side and center respectively; four particularly important branching sites of those channels, the
so-called "wheels" ('khor lo, cakra) located at the head, throat, heart and navel (with the genitals often added
as a fifth); and a series of winds and nuclei that course through these conduits. The Seminal Heart variation
on this template is to locate the forty two peaceful deities within the heart and the fifty eight wrathful deities
within the head, as well as add a more subtle network of light channels ('od rtsa) within the sheaths of the
ordinary channels. As we shall see, these variations are crucial elements in providing a conceptual support
to the tradition's innovative styles of tantric praxis. The Tantra of Self-Arising Awareness describes this
network of light thus:
The wisdom of the ultra-pure Buddhas
Resides in the manner of Spiritual Bodies and primordial gnoses,
In the inner being of all sentient beings.
To expand on this, it exists within their tsitta's (i.e. the heart) center
In the size of a mustard or sesame seed,
Perfectly complete without any development-as-such.
The tsitta's four gateways are unobstructedly radiant:
They bring about the ongoing shining forth,
The ongoing dissolving,
The instantaneous shining forth,
And the instantaneous dissolving (of radiant light).
Furthermore, the articulation of their names is like this:
The great kari golden channel,
The crystal tube with hollow interior,
The white silk thread/slender coil,
And the great naturally free empty channel.
These four gateways are the channels for primordial gnosis's natural self-presencing:
Emerging onto the path from the heart, the gnostic light dissolves into the avadhūti,
And from within the avadhuti, the light emanates outwards,
Having emerged onto the pathway through the right side of the vertebrae,
It dissolves from the right small extremities (channel) into the conch shell house (i.e. the skull).
Light then emanates from that through the eyes), and the four lamps
Are present within the unobstructed empty sky
As Spiritual Bodies of light, vividly lucent and intensely clear,
In the manner of linked chains.
79. Ab vol. I. p. 526.2.



DE
David Germano
The four lamps are like this:
The lamp of empty seminal nuclei,
The lamp of awareness' expanse,
The lamp of self emergent insight,
And the lamp of far ranging water,
Which exist within all sentient beings.
The basic ideological import of this network of light is the tradition's resolute emphasis on Buddha-nature,
which it sees as chiefly resident within the heart as it creates ordinary psycho-physical existence from
within, rather than the other way around. Thus in contrast to the "indestructible nucleus" (mi shigs pa'i thig
le) locked away in the heart spoken of in many representations of the subtle body in Anuttarayoga tantra
material, the presence of this Buddha-nature is an active agency stretching throughout the body, as well as
connecting the individual's most intimate heart with the exterior fields of perception.
It is this light channel then which leads from the mandalic Buddha-identity of radiant light ('od gsal) at
the heart to the eyes and thus out into the field (dbyings, dhātu) of experience, where the internal light
undergoes various transformations externally within the field of vision. In fact, vision is exclusively stressed
in this practice, unlike the strong aural and tactile orientation of many perfection phase techniques (though
sound is extremely important in its preliminary practices and I would argue that the breakthrough involves
a felt sense of the body's gravity). This heart to eyes connection is almost exclusively stressed, such that the
genitals and navel are basically irrelevant, as is the paradigmatic movement of ambrosial substances from
the crown cakra down the central channel. Thus sexuality is markedly de-emphasized, which is amplified
rhetorically by criticism of sexually-based yoga, whether it relies on sexual intercourse or interior
contemplative reenactment of erotic sensations. This again reverses an element of increasing importance in
the history of Buddhist tantra, which climaxes with the Yogini tantras' central valorization of sexual yoga,
iconographic dependence upon divine couples having sexual intercourse, and representation of the body's
interior as dominated by a head to genitals axis. The following quote from The Tantra of Unimpeded Sound
clearly contrasts sexual yogic practices with the luminous visions of direct transcendence by characterizing
the former as lower practices working with "conventional" nuclei (thig le, bindu), while the latter are
portrayed as superior techniques centered on the ultimate" nuclei: 0
Since you desire to rely on the reality of seminal nuclei,
(I will discuss the contemplative techniques)
Relating to the ultimate and conventional (seminal nuclei).
(i) Those who for the time being desire Buddhahood
In reliance upon the conventional seminal nuclei should do as follows:
Your consort should have the complete requisite characteristics -
When you spot one with the perfect characteristics
Whether she be a goddess, demigoddess, Brahmin caste,
Low caste, or a heretic,
You begin with the techniques for attracting her,
And then you must perfect your bodies
Via the object of reliance (i.e. consort), the channels,
And the focus of visualization (i.e. the seminal nuclei, and so forth).
Then, you must bring the conventional seminal nuclei down, retain them reverse them (back upwards)
Disperse them within the channels, and mix them with the winds:
You then must rely upon emptiness, eradicate your intellect,
And reverse your ordinary body and mind.
80. Ab vol. 1. p. 63.3. In the tantra, it is presented as the reply to the thirty fourth question of the first chapter: "What
are the aspects of the seminal nuclei like?"



The Shifting Terrain of the Tantric Bodies
(ii) On the other hand, through reliance upon the ultimate seminal nuclei
You can meet with the objects of the empty Reality Body (chos sku, dharmakäya):
Stimulating the lamp of the empty seminal nuclei (i.e. direct transcendence practice)
You train on awareness' efflorescent dynamics,
And when you finally gain deep attunement such that their luminosity
Is vividly clear) without ordinary distinctions between daytime and nighttime,
These (luminous nuclei) directly manifest without any exertion on your part-
This is the measure indicating experiential mastery (of this practice).
In fact, as far as I can determine, this is the only passage in the entire set of The Seventeen Tantras that
explicitly describes sexual yogic techniques; the associated rubric "Fierce Woman" (gtum mo, candāli)
doesn't even occur once. The Seminal Heart of Vimalamitra has a more extensive discussion in a short text
seemingly attributed to Vimalamitra, but its title clearly indicates the attitude expressed towards these
practices: "Esoteric Precepts for Taking Care of Those Whose Access to the Spiritual Family is Blocked." A
concluding comment also makes it perfectly clear that describing these techniques is for the yogically
dysfunctional. It is only in the fourteenth century The Seminal Heart of the Sky Dancer and in
Longchenpa's corpus that extensive discussions of these practices appear, in which context they are still
explicitly identified as lower order practices to be used only as auxiliaries.
In addition, the direct transcendence's practice and representations of the body contrast strikingly to
another important tantric technique that focuses on movement out of the body, namely the transference" of
consciousness ('pho ba). In this practice, which is in effect a rehearsal for the eventuality of a sudden death,
one's consciousness is imaged as a ball or syllable of light which is impelled up and down the central
channel from the heart to its upper opening at the top of the head. In fact, this paradigm is an ancient one,
since this context of death focused on the heart to head connection is perhaps the most common context in
the early Upanişads in which subtle physiology is first referred to in Indian discourse. In this Buddhist tantric
discourse, consciousness only truly departs through this gateway at death itself, when it is blasted out of the
top of the skull; furthermore, the entire process involves controlled visualization
Thus I believe the significance of this revised subtle physiology supporting this innovative
transformation of both generation and perfection phase technologies is, at least from its own perspective,
that it overcomes the long history of ever increasing interiorization in Buddhist tantra, with the attendant
solipsism of focus on the surface appearance and deep interior reaches of one's own body. In this obsessive
concern with transformations happening within and as one's self, it could be argued that there is a danger
that the practitioner never escapes the circular loops of self-as-deity to the outside world. By undercutting
this tendency towards increasing interiority (Buddha encounter to identity transference to subtle bodies) and
focusing on awareness' radiation (rig pa'i gdangs) moving out through the eyes into the sky rather than
visions within the body, we can perhaps see a valorization of inter-subjectivity, of going out of self into the
external fields which are both self-constituted and self-constituting. This movement also goes beyond deity
yoga, which is explicit in the tradition's own rhetoric, instead of which it reinstitutes the spontaneous
encounter scenario out in front of the practitioner in a form very similar to the early Mahāyāna practices
detailed in the Pratyutpanna Sätra. However there are crucial differences in the nature and significance of
the encounter, such that it does not simply constitute a regression to practices preceding the codification of
the transfer of self-identity and body image. While in early Mahāyāna pure land cults the Buddha was often
understood as a gnostic force suddenly appearing from without a moment later ritualized in generation stage
practice as the "descent of gnosis," in direct transcendence the Buddhas are instead explicitly and viscerally
understood as flowing outwards from within. In this way, it is not an encounter to which the practitioner is
subordinated, but rather s/he is integrated into an interdependent pattern that traverses interior and exterior
spaces, such that internal awareness (rig pa) is interlaced in the expanse of external space (dbyings). Such a
81. See VNT vol. 1, pp. 360.4-373.4, and 369.2-373.4 in particular
82. VNT vol. 1, pp. 372.5 ff.



70
David Germano
movement is prefigured in the Pratyutpanna Sūtra, when the answer to the question as to the origin and
destination of these Buddha images points back to the practitioner's own mind. However, the tantric
physiology and Buddha-nature ideology of the Seminal Heart tradition provides a far more visceral body-
based sensation of the indwelling source of the apparitions of Buddhas beyond mere rhetorical attributions
to the mind's projective capacity. In addition, the Seminal Heart - via its pervasive tantric imagery, concepts
and syntax - is explicitly situated within the fields of tantric discourse and praxis, which gives its elements
a much different valence within the history of those traditions than the formally identical element situated
within the quite different fields of early Mahāyāna discourse and praxis. In other words, it must be
understood in dialogical relationship to Buddhist tantra's intensifying tendency towards interiority, its strong
control rhetoric, and its iconic focus on self-as-Buddha. This is the proper context in which to understand
the persistent claim of the own tradition to represent a post-tantra movement.
This dual branched channel of light is thus the escape conduit by which the tradition overcomes both
deity yoga and standard subtle body practice, thereby throwing the practitioner into external fields of vision
in the surrounding world and minimizing the danger of tantric focus on the individual self isolated from the
interdependent processes that constitute it. Rather than thinking of oneself as a singular Buddha, the
practitioner surrenders self-identity to pluralized fields of Buddhas of which s/he is part in immense visions
stretching across the sky, not minute intricate mandalas located in a tiny sphere within the body's interior.
To refer back to Tsongkhapa's principle of deity yoga as the defining mark of all tantra, one can immediately
see how this normative definition is rendered problematic. In addition to the earlier stages of the Great
Perfection and affiliated movements which rhetorically rejected cultivated visualizations along with many
other Buddhist standards, we thus have here a reformulation of contemplative focus on Buddha images,
rather than a simple rejection. One could attempt to modify the principle, as Tsongkhapa himself expands it
to include subtle body praxis in the Anuttarayoga tantras, but I think in doing so the entire rationale would
unravel. One's "self" endowed with the Form Body of a Buddha would need to include this exteriorized self,
and not just the outlines of the body, while the line between self-generation and generation-in-front would
be irretrievably blurred.
Release, death and contemplative recreation
The stress on spontaneous imagery also undercuts the strong tantric emphasis on control, manipulation and
regimentation. Certainly non-programmed light imagery is present in other tantric practices, but I know of
no other case in which it appears externally, takes the shape of Buddhas and is the central defining
contemplative process of the tradition in question without in any way being coordinated with visualization.
Aside from not existing within a tantric discursive field, the early Mahāyāna practice of vision quests
appears to utilize visualization to initiate the visions and it is unclear if there is any graduated process
involving extended sequences of light images that only very slowly take the shape of Buddhas. Direct
transcendence's undercutting of the rhetoric of control is also reflected in the absence of any focus on
confining of energies in the body's center, a defining paradigm of late Buddhist tantric practice in India. This
is replaced by a effortless expansion outwards in contemplation of the column of light naturally running up
the body's center. While I quote from Longchenpa's fourteenth century Treasury of Spiritual Systems, his
comments clearly reflect the basic thrust of the much earlier Seventeen Tantras:
The lower secret mantra (systems) hold that by inserting the wind-mind energies of your solitary
and flavor channels (i.e. right and left) into the central channel, a primordial gnosis of bliss, clarity
and non-conceptuality will emerge, which they identify as innate (gnosis). However in fact this in
no way reverses your ordinary eight fold consciousness based on the universal ground (kun gzhi,
ālaya): the blissful sensation is due to the ordinary egoic psyche (yid, manas) and the emotionally
distorted psyche (nyon yid, klişñamanas), while the lack of conceptuality in the undivided lucency
83. Pp. 382.1-383.3. See Dudjom 1991, pp. 40-341 for a translation of his abridged account, which is primarily a
reworded presentation of Longchenpa's comments.



The Shifting Terrain of the Tantric Bodies
is the universal ground. The slight clarity and lucency (they experience) is the universal ground
consciousness, while that which appears in terms of the individual five types of coarse sensory
objects and cognitive faculties (such as visible forms and sounds) are the five sensory modes of
consciousness. Yet if those (modes of consciousness) are not reversed, you won't become free of
cyclic existence, since you are manifestly not free from the mind-sets of cyclic existence. Since
this style of practice is not different from that outlined in the Samkhya scriptures [he cites a
passage from therein...). they don't accomplish freedom from the mind-state of the formless
meditative states (bsam gtan, dhyāna).
They hold that the joy of mixing the channels, winds and seminal nuclei into a single flavor
is the pristine dimension (rnal ma), and thus believe that the respective enlightened qualities
manifest by force of liberating the corresponding channel-knots as the winds and seminal elements
enter the central channel from the flavor and solitary channels. Thus there are many obstacles - as
the winds enter the channel-petals energetically corresponding to the various six types of living
beings, many delusory appearances manifest. In this way it constitutes the key point of why
deviation comes to pass (for such practitioners).
Since in the context (of Great Perfection contemplation) the winds are left to naturally calm
down of their own accord, there is no insertion into the central channel. When the wind currents
of the individual channel petals become naturally purified, the gnostic winds of the luminous
channel shine of their own accord in their own state. Thus there is a lighting-up of primordial
gnosis as there manifests such visions as the Spiritual Bodies, lights, and pure realms, while no
distorted appearances at all manifest. As the luminous channel in the center intensifies, the
channel-knots sequentially pass into light and are free - this is what we assert. The enlightened
qualities of the (Bodhisattva) stages manifest in a self-presencing way. To expand on that, by force
of the first two channel-knots becoming liberated into light, twelve hundred Buddha realms
manifest within the luminosity that lights up externally...
This is thus exceedingly superior to the level of the lower vehicles. If your mind is of cyclic
existence when you practice, the result will be cyclic existence... Since (the Great Perfection) is
free of the mind-sets of cyclic existence via the path, this is the key point of rapidly arriving right
at the fruit. Nowadays those who desire Buddhahood from the ordinary mind don't understand this
key point, and thus don't know the real path - primordial gnosis and the mind substantially
contradict each other...
In addition to not being based on a recreation of sexual excitement, since it is not centered on the
manipulative dissolution of the body's winds into the central channel, it also does not contemplatively mimic
the elements' dissolution understood to occur in the process of dying. Such mimicking is in fact one of the
defining characteristics of late Buddhist tantric contemplation, such as in The Esoteric Assembly Tantra's
exegetical tradition: through different subtle body techniques, all of the psycho-physical currents of energy
("winds") are confined to the central channel, such that they dissolve into the person's ultimate identity as
the heart's "indestructible nucleus" (mi shigs pa'i thig le) of the most subtle winds and mind. This recreation
of the event of dying as the collapse of all structure into the body's deep interior results in the manifestation
of "radiant light" ('od gsal, prabhāsvara), a psychic state utilized to realize emptiness and thereby reshape
one's body image into the illusory body (sgyu lus, māyādeha) of a Buddha. Geshe Sopa summarizes this
paradigm in the following terms as governing most Anuttarayoga tantras, with the significant exception of
The Wheel of Time Tantra:85 "The fundamental basis of purification (i.e. death, intermediate state, and birth).
the path (i.e., the cultivation of the union of illusory body and clear light) and the final result i.e. the three
bodies)... enlightenment is often achieved not in the current life but in the intermediate state. The Wheel
of Time Tantra is distinctive in not taking the intermediate state as one of its bases of contemplative
84. Sopa 1983, pp. 52-54.
85. Sopa 1983. p. 54.



David Germano
purification, but instead using the outer and inner wheels of time as set forth in its own texts - the former
a cosmology of the external universe and the latter a meta-physiological representation of the body's subtle
interior. I would like to point out that these roughly contemporaneous systems (eleventh centuries) not only
share unusual divergences from many of the standard contemplative paradigms governing tantric Buddhism
at that time, but also intricate cosmogonic discourses that are interwoven with those contemplative systems
(see below).
While the Seminal Heart tradition is not driven by the logic of sexuality, it must be pointed out that
unlike The Wheel of Time Tantra (relatively speaking), it is obsessively centered around the phenomena of
death, the second of the twin pillars of late Indian Buddhist tantra. In fact it is the original source of the
syncretic transformation of Indian Buddhist discourses about the intermediate state (bar do, antarābhāva)
which later became so famous in the derivative fourteenth century revelations of Karma Lingpa (Kar ma
gling pa, 1327-1387) known in English-language circles as The Tibetan Book of the Dead. However, while
its account of the process of dying is generally similar to the accounts in The Esoteric Assembly Tantra
literature, on which it is surely indirectly based, the tradition's contemplative utilization of the events of
dying, death and post-death are strikingly different from that literature's paradigms. To begin with, the
practice of direct transcendence involves a release or letting-go (cog bzhag) represented by the breakthrough
contemplation, which itself is structurally parallel to the process of dying. However, this recreation of dying
occurs by releasing discursive control of experience and allowing the breakthrough/down to happen, rather
than forcefully reenacting death within the body's interior through manipulation of winds. This death - as
incarnated in the contemplative surrender of control and manipulation - immediately initiates an unfolding
of images rather than a collapse or withdrawal. In other words, it allows a self-presentation of the
indwelling Buddha-nature) to take place that stems from the body's deep interior, but which from the start
manifests in external space. After an extended process of allowing images to flow out and gradually
constellate into very diverse shapes and patterns, the entire contemplation finally climaxes with dissolution,
a dissolution of the images across the sky which is understood to mark the attainment of enlightenment. This
can be contrasted to a coercively initiated withdrawal of winds from exteriority that sparks a controlled
dissolution into the body's deep interior, a process which yields an unfolding illusory body only after this
extended process of forced dissolution into the body's interior. Thus we can discern many differences-in-
similarity on the registers of release and control, dissolution and unfolding, and perhaps most importantly,
exteriority and interiority.
In fact, the direct transcendence praxis is understood to recreate the scenario of post-death experience
(bar do) rather than the process of dying's systemic collapse. Furthermore the entire characterization of post-
death events is extensively transformed in this body of literature to involve a systematic self-presentation of
the peaceful and wrathful Buddhas in the vast stretching skies that confront the revived consciousness
following death. The clearest account is found in The Tantra of the Sun and Moon's Intimate Union, which
is devoted to the subject of dying, post-death and rebirth:**
The "dissolution of individuals' consciousness into radiant light": the instant your external and
internal breath's circulation is cut off, the manifestation of things via your own sensory faculties
is absent, yet the feeling they are present persists - while your corporeal body is un-manifest, you
are radiantly clear in a body of light.
At this time everything that comes into your scope of sensory lights-up as mandalas of five
colored light rays. Moreover, if looked at from without, these manifestations are internally radiant,
and if looked at from within, they are externally radiant; they are a totally unimpeded transparency
without externality or internality. They resemble water quivering at the point of overflow - if
86. Sopa 1983, p. 56.
87. The full cycle is actually entitled The Profound Doctrine of Wisdom's Natural Freedom (in Encountering) the
Peaceful and Wruthful Deities.
88. Ab vol. 3, p. 221.1.



The Shifting Terrain of the Tantric Bodies
pressed they seem to cave in, and if raised they seem to leap upwards. These appearances are
extremely captivating, their extraordinarily brilliant colors are distinct without any mixing, they
are naturally radiant, and their uniformly symmetrical radiance is unceasing.
If you properly gaze at the lights' ultra-purity, they are exceedingly subtle, flickering,
vibrating, throbbing, and naturally lustrous with their intense brilliance. Their manifestation is
exceedingly vast to an extent that can't be fathomed, their lofty heights are such that it is termed
"the vast peak," and these rainbow colored lights are present as the source of all the mandalas.
The visions, made possible only by death's dissolution, are further described in the same text thus:89
Furthermore there is "the dissolution of the individual's radiant light within integration": those
rainbow colored appearances naturally arise in the aspect of the Spiritual Bodies, and those Bodies
are similar in dimensions without any being larger or smaller, including ornaments, colors, manner
of sitting, throne-seat, and their individual symbolic gestures (and emblems). Those Bodies'
presence pervades everywhere with their fivefold couplings, and each group of five has encircling
hoops of light, while the spiritual families as embodied in the Fathers, the spiritual families as
embodied in the Mothers, the Awakening Heroes and Heroines (Bodhisattvas), and all the rest of
the mandala are perfectly present in "one."
At this time an extremely fine band of light shines forth from your own heart, manifesting
such that it is links you to all those Bodies' Hearts. If you apprehend this with your own cognition,
you will naturally remain within non-conceptual contemplation. This is termed "awareness
entering light."
In all those appearances a powerful throbbing becomes manifest, and from your heart's cord
of light rays as well countless minute nuclei shine forth. Then from your own heart a cord of light
rays like colored threads woven together shines forth. Then there manifests a vision where you
experience all those Bodies dissolving within your own body, which is termed "light entering
awareness hither." At this time, those individuals must keep in mind the supreme liberative means
revolving around belief and trust in these visions as your own self-presencing, "like a child
entering its mother's lap."
The luminous channels thus transcend the intensely private experiences of sexuality and death, moving
tantric practice back to life, to a body-generated spinning out of pure worlds in external space, to the shifting
inter-subjective worlds the practitioner ultimately must live within. I would also (very) tentatively suggest
that since the interior body has at this point been so thoroughly managed and controlled by Buddhist
colonization which has reinscribed the entire Buddhist cosmos and ideology within it, that slipping into the
vaster reaches of external space in part functions as an escape from certain elements of Buddhist discourse,
though it immediately unfolds the most classic of all Buddhist mandalas within this celestial locale.
Triune cosmogony and the human body
However, to fully understand this intersection between post-death visions of self-presenting Buddhas and
the light meditations of direct transcendence, we must retrace our steps back to the beginning, namely to
Seminal Heart's distinctive cosmogony which directly parallels both. In brief, out of a ground (gzhi) which
is nothing (med pa), pure lands of mandalically organized light unfold in a process termed the ground-
presencing (gzhi snang). This is visually presented as a vast panorama of realms seen as if from a cliff,
trailing off into the nothingness of the Reality Body (chos sku, dharmakāya) at its heights and materializing
into the specter of cyclic existences ('khor ba, samsāra) below; in between, however, the main part of the
display is discussed in terms of pure lands of Buddha manifestations with intense light, mandalic
configurations and perfect integration. The Exquisite Auspiciousness Tantra describes the moment thus:
The encasing seal of the winner Youthful Body of the Vase" (i.e. the "ground, " such that the bodies
within a body theme is already present) being rent open, it is present as the outer abiding
89. Ab vol. 3. p. 222.3.



David Germano
reality of spontaneous presence. At precisely that point, my manifestations are rent open into
exteriority, and flow forth in transparency, shimmering, intangible, undulating, quivering,
throbbing, and variegated.
Then there comes to be the great abiding reality of spontaneous presence. From within the
unobstructed clearing-space of its primordial gnosis, the presencing process of the Enjoyment
Body's (longs sku, sambhogakāya) pure lands comes to be. From within the unobstructed clearing-
space of its dynamic qualities, the presencing process of the natural Emanational Bodies (sprul
sku, nirmāņakāya) comes into being. From within the unobstructed clearing-space of its
compassion, the presencing process of the impure emerges.
This initial scenario of beginnings is thus recapitulated at the moment of death, when dying's dissolution
delivers one back to the pure process fluidity of the ground. The post-death visions then represent the vibrant
ground-presencing reemerging from the ground. It is also this moment which is re-evoked, but this time with
full reflexive awareness, in the practice of direct transcendence. In this light, we can see that the practice of
breakthrough structurally and functionally parallels the event of death, though it does so through release of
control of the experiential field and not in Anuttarayoga fashion through the forced dissolution of psycho-
physical currents of energy into the body's deep interior. At any rate, whether the pure process of the ground
is present at the cosmos's beginnings, in personal death, or contemplative release, its restirring into initially
luminous manifestation presents what we might term a hermeneutical dilemma: are these external
appearances self or other? In the tradition's own terms, the single ground gives way to two paths
differentiated by the presence, or lack, of self-recognition (rang ngo shes pa): the path to nirvana of
Samantabhadra which dissolves strict boundaries between self and other, and the path to samsāra of ordinary
sentient beings which concretizes such boundaries. Leaving aside for a moment the seemingly idealist
overtones of this scenario, I will show how this basic dialectic applies in identical terms to all three contexts
of the visions: cosmogonic, contemplative, and post-death.
In the cosmogonic context of Samantabhadra's primordial enlightenment, The Tantra of Unimpeded
Sound says:92
Thus from the beginning and end of cyclic existence and transcendent reality,
The Expansively Awakened One has not strayed -
This insight faculty raised-up from the ground
Recognizes the self-presencing process as lacking any independent existence of its own,
And without its slipping outwards into the multi-dimensional psyche with its reifying
discursive thought processes,
The flickering movement immediately cuts out in and of itself.
A similar description is given of post-death experiences in The Lion's Perfect Dynamism says:93
The compassion of the Buddhas' wisdom-energy
Primordially naturally pervades all living beings.
And thus when esoteric awareness manifests objectively,
The five manifest lights are like the meeting of a mother and child (i.e. instant recognition) -
When the son appearances dissolve within the mother
All the displays and experiences of the manipulating intellect are cleansed away,
And having thus eliminated distorted thoughts and scriptural doubts
90. I disagree with Samuel (1989) who seems to see the subtle body in Indian tantra almost exclusively in terms of
release from social control. In fact Ots (1994) argues precisely the opposite to be the case in at contemporary China.
91. Ab vol. I, p. 215.1.
92. Ab vol. 1. p. 107.5.
93. This passage is cited in Longchenpa's The Treasury of Precious Words and Meanings, though I have been unable
to identify it within the current editions of the tantra itself



The Shifting Terrain of the Tantric Bodies
The sun of primordial gnosis lights-up everywhere with its rays,
Totally dispersing the night-darkness of material things'illusion.
Because you are divested of the conceptual mind's doubts
Awareness' insight comes into its full strength,
Whereupon you emerge accordingly in a state beyond thought...
While as you abide in a crystal hut within this vast city
You experience the presence of primordial gnosis beyond language,
And come to see the authentic visions of the Secret Mantra.
When you don't process these pure objective visions of insight
In terms of conceptual considerations as to "is" and "is not,"
It is said that in five days you will obtain deep contemplation
Finally, The Great Esoteric Unwritten Tantra presents the appropriate way in which to encounter the direct
transcendence visions:
The great means of awareness wherein you nakedly let appearances be
Is the foundation of all the great appearances:
As the Buddhas of the five elements light-up in the manner of the path,
And shine in the lighting-up of the foundational great five elements,
Rest within the state of non-distraction, in the great absence of fixation!
With these five great lights of the great secret mantra's five great primordial gnoses
Rest within the expanse devoid of disruption and agitation!
This naked letting-be of the Adamantine Hero's awareness
Reveals all the visionary appearances of the Reality Body -
With the naked vision of primordial gnosis's pure lighting-up
Rest within the state of the great naked letting-be as the means of esoterically letting be,
Neither actively rejecting nor distracted by the five elements in the Spiritual Bodies' appearance,
As you rest within this state's presence!
We may seem at this point to have gotten far away from the human body, yet other passages clearly indicate
this cosmogonic ground as none other than Buddha nature or radiant light located in each living being's
heart. From The inlaid Jewels Tantra:95
Just as oil is itself primordially spontaneously present
Within a sesame or mustard seed,
The seed of the Tathāgatas' enlightened energy
Manifests along with its concordant luminosity
Within the deceptive embodied experiences of sentient beings.
Thus the cosmic narrative of the ground's unfolding intersects with Buddha-nature, the original body within
a body discourse in Mahāyāna. The resulting detailed incorporation of the entire cosmogonic process within
the body's interior as an account of personal consciousness through its permutations of waking, sleeping and
dreaming is most clearly explained in a short text of Longchenpa's entitled Introduction to the Lighting-up
of the Expanse. Here we see very clearly how this internalized cosmogonic process accounts not only for
ordinary modes of consciousness, but also the special character of the contemplative visions:
94. Ab vol. 2. p. 230.4.
95. Ab vol. 2. p. 24.1.
96. KGNT vol. 3, pp. 118.6 ff. I have not as yet located such an elaborate account in any of The Seventeen Tantras
themselves, but the general framework of the cosmological "ground" (zhi) radiating out from each individual's
heart as the source of consciousness is clearly present throughout those texts.



David Germano
... First is the way in which the ground's expanse abides. Prior to everything, there is the ground
of the emanation of the triad of (empty) essence, (radiant) nature and (pervading) compassion from
the great spontaneity of the primeval expanse (dbyings, dhāru). These three are totally indivisible,
yet out of the essence's range the five lights of what is principally its nature's lighting-up
manifests, together with which compassion's radiance manifests as awareness. If simultaneously
there is self-recognition, it all) proceeds back again to the range of the ground itself, and one takes
hold of the secure site of the seamless union of the three Spiritual Bodies... Through the ignorant
not recognizing (these appearances) as their own light, there is the so-called "co-emergent lack of
awareness"; through their fixation on the self-presencing as other, there is the so-called "rampantly
reifying lack of awareness." Thus the causes and conditions (of samsāra) are formed...
These three channels (of the human body described) in ordinary tantras... are not ultimate, and
hence should be termed the channel-petals of samsāra." The channel-petal of the great primordial
nirvāṇa, on the other hand, is termed the channel of self-emerging gnosis (ye shes, jñāna)," "the
channel of the spontaneous ground-presencing," and the "channel of the pure crystal tube."
Its essence is self-emerging gnosis beyond the ordinary mind, while its visible aspect is
luminous visions, since it is the unceasing shining process of the five Buddhas' (radiant) nature
and (pervading) compassion. Thus it totally pervades all of samsāra and nirvāna, the material
environments and life forms. Having linked up within the vitality channel of the heart's eight
cornered precious (palace) at the central channel's center, it acts as the support for all psychic
activity. By winds pulling it into the channel's sheath, it functions as the operative ground of the
five sensory modes of consciousness, the universal ground (kun gzhi, alaya) and the egoic
consciousness (yid shes, manovijñāna). When its radiation spreads within (all) the channels within
the body, it exists in terms of lights and nuclei. It seems like they really exist in the sphere of the
sky when they shine (as contemplative visions) on the surface of the tarnish-free mirror of their
gateway, the "water lamp" (i.e. the eyes). However, one can see that the visions) don't exist
externally in the way these small nuclei and luminous appearances are uninterrupted even when
one shuts one's eyes.
When that luminous channel's radiation abides within the vitality channel (i.e. the aorta)
under the conditions of failure to recognize the self-emerging gnosis as self, it is termed the
"indeterminate universal ground." The unceasing lucency and radiance of its radiation is the
universal ground consciousness (kun gzhi'i rnam shes, alayavijñāna) located within the vitality
channel. Then its radiation spreads to the five sensory gateways (the eyes and so forth), such that
the five sensory modes of consciousness become operative as mere non-conceptual vivid
perceptions. The egoic consciousness (then ensues) when there is adulterated apprehension of the
previous presence as an object through conceptualization. Its first instant is non-conceptual, but
then the emotionally disturbed ego (nyon mongs pa can gyi yid, klişñamanas) kicks in when the
objects) are processed in terms of the emotional triad of attachment, aversion and neutrality, as
relevant to the context.
Then when one is falling asleep, the five sensory modes along with the egoic consciousness
enter into the universal ground consciousness, such that there is an experience) of empty radiant
light as one abides for an instant in non-conceptual clarity. Then that dissolves into the universal
ground, such that there is only non-conceptuality as all of the wind-mind energy of the right and
left channels based upon the five senses' channel-petals dissolve into the central channel. When
one is then in one pointed sleep immersed) in ignorance, there manifests a pure experience of
radiant light totally devoid of dreams if one integrates it with stable contemplative experiences of
bliss, radiant and non-conceptuality that have been previously attuned. At this time, for some yogis
with the blessings of their Gurus and who have seen the five colored visions during the daytime,
the central channel's winds dissolve into the crystal tube. The self-emerging appearances of the
ground-presencing thus shine forth.



The Shifting Terrain of the Tantric Bodies
77
If you wonder what that is like, small nuclei dawn like planets and stars above in the sky-like
range of originary purity. Directly across, pure lands (manifest) like optical illusions in the range
of the rainbow-like Enjoyment Bodies. Below, there manifest pleasures and pains like mirages in
the range of the dream-like six modes of beings i.e. gods, demigods, humans, and so forth). By
recognizing all of that as self-presencing, the symbols dissolve and defilements are exhausted
within the sky of phenomena's exhaustion, the range of original purity. I myself saw these in
nighttime precious visions of gnosis through the blessings of Padmasambhava.
If instead one lacks the key points of contemplative attunement, a wind stirs from the central
channel into the vitality channel. Thus the egoic consciousness rises up from the universal ground
with its diverse karmic latencies (bag chags, vāsanā), such that a variety of dreams manifest...
The text goes on to detail the way in which these modes of consciousness operate during the waking periods,
and concludes with an account of the process of dying and post-death experience that again describes visions
as "the great ground-presencing."
Subsequently in the same collection of texts, Longchenpa provides an even more detailed account of
the cosmogonic process transpiring within the metaphysiology of the body's interior. Thus the unfolding of
pure lands in the so-called "ground-presencing" is present in a fourth context, that of the body's interior or
peri-personal space. It is ceaselessly reoccurring every moment of the day in the deep background of one's
being, such that the Buddha-matrix's luminosity is automatically materialized into the distorted appearances
('khrul snang) of samsāra within the conduits of the body's infrastructure. The passage in question directly
follows a cosmogonic account of the origins and formation of samsära:
Within our human bodies) in the present moment, the ground - self-emerging primordial gnosis
- and the ground-presencing abide in their respective channel-petals out'of the heart's luminous
channel. The ground-presencing of gnosis manifests in the sky from the luminous channel, while
the ground-presencing of the six types of beings is as follows. The radiating rays of gnosis in the
heart mix with the lung's winds, such that it operates as the eight modes of consciousness within
the heart's eight channels. In this way, the radiating rays pervade the individual channel-petals of
the six modes of being from (one's) head to foot."
When one's wind-mind energy gathers in these locations), the distorted experiences of the
(corresponding type of the) six modes of being manifest. This is the manifestation (filtered)
through the impure gateway of samsāra. For we humans, the wind-mind energy is now
concentrated in the channel-petal of humans. This is the key as to why we experience human
objects, human places and so on.
Thus the entire cosmogony proceeds ceaselessly, albeit in the background, in the interior spaces of the body.
Note that "gnosis" is associated with its manifestation in the sky," while samsära is associated with its
internal manifestation within the body's energetic channels. The practice of direct transcendence brings
97. KGNT vol. 3. pp. 202.2-203.3 In Longchenpa's The Wish-Fulfilling Treasure (pp. 561, 668), Longchenpa discusses
how standard tantric ideology specifies that the wind-mind energies' concentration in a bodily locale corresponding
to a particular type of being will result in the practitioner having corresponding experiences. See the quote above
from The Treasury of Spiritual Systems, where he criticizes normal perfection phase practices for their tendenc
create situations in which the winds can become mischanneled in this fashion; he contrasts this to the direct
transcendence, in which the inner light simply spontaneously expands outwards, thus bypassing this danger. While
he doesn't quote from any tantras in this context, my impression is that these types of passages do exist in
Anuttarayoga tantras, though I am uncertain to what extent. They clearly form a basic cosmogonic paradigm in the
subtle body that the Seminal Heart builds upon.
98. The eight modes of consciousness are the standard sequence of the five types of sensory cognition, psychic
cognition (yid shes), emotionally distorted psyche (nyon yid), and the universal ground consciousness (kun gzhi'i
mam par shes pa).
99. The six standard types of beings in a Buddhist cosmos are gods, demigods, humans, animals, starving spirits and
hell beings.



David Germano
these background events out into the foreground by drawing them forth from the body's interior into the
exterior expanse of the sky. The consequent visions thus entail watching internal psycho-cosmogonic events
mirrored in the sky, such that the slowly emerging gestalts of Buddhas represent one's own psycho-physical
energy reconfiguring within and without. The process of bringing it to the fore bypasses the ordinary
routinized internal conversions of the ground-presencing, into distorted experiences, such that a reflexive
understanding of its true nature again becomes possible. Once the reconfiguration has reached its optimal
limits in the form of lucent mandalas of the one hundred serene and wrathful deities that pervade the entire
sky (the third vision), their consequent dissolution (the fourth vision) marks the end of the compulsive
exteriorization of the body's interior. Instead, the Buddha's manifestation of forms is described in a language
of play (rol pa), adornment (rgyan) and compassion (thugs rje), a subject which will take us too far a field
for the time being.
Conclusion: self-constituting Buddhas!
While I have stressed the innovativeness of the tradition to accentuate and explicate its own self-
representation, it is important to compare parallel elements in tantric traditions that mirror this emphasis on
spontaneous light imagery, external visions, criticism of sexual practices and deity yoga, deconstruction of
deep interiorization and undercutting of manipulative controls of internal energies. For example, there are
the "four night and six daytime signs" mentioned above that occur as spontaneous apparitions in The Wheel
of Time Tantra, or Saraha's criticism of sexual yoga. However, for the time being, I have at least suggested
how even in this most experiential of zones, we can perceive the tension of discourses and ideologies in
dialogue with each other, and the need to think these poles - body and text, mysticism and discourse -
together, separate but interrelated. In doing so, I have problematized the assumption that deity yoga and
complicated subtle body practices were invariably the defining facets of classical Buddhist tantra, in contrast
to which there were only naturalistic rejections of all image-related practice such as in Mahāmudrā and the
Great Perfection. Primary among the Seminal Heart's striking features are the focus on the conduit between
the heart to the eyes that overcomes solipsistic focus on the body's interiority and surface, and the anti-
control rhetoric that substitutes letting-go to ignite the flow of images for the manipulative centering of the
body's currents of energy in the central channel. This latter element reflects the paradigm of becoming a
Buddha through surrender rather than control, as evident also in some of the the Dohā songs of Buddhist
Siddhas in India. Finally, these practices in párt functioned to de-structure Buddhist discourse with its strong
ethical formulations that continued in tantra with the internalized bodhicitta, 102 its heavily regulated ritual
and visualization sequences, and the like. When we become aware of how structure and process, the body
and text, experience and tradition were as compelling and contested issues for the diverse trends within Indo-
Tibetan Buddhist tantrism as they are for ourselves today, we can better reconstruct and appreciate the
histories of the perpetually unfolding teachings of the Buddha in his tantric modality.
I would like to briefly recapitulate the essentials of the Seminal Heart's metaphysiology. The two
centers ('khor lo, cakra) highlighted above all are the heart and the head, while the navel and genitals recede
into the background. The heart is understood as the eight cornered tsitta (citta) palace of the forty two serene
deities, while the head is described as the "conch shell house" of the fifty eight wrathful deities. In addition,
100. I would like to note how the subtle body of the Seminal Heart tradition is partially integrated with early Tibetan
medical representations of the body's interior, and vice a versa. In fact, the key medical scripture was a revealed
text contemporaneous with the revelation of the principal Seminal Heart tantras, and its finder was an important
member of the same Nyingma tradition. It is as yet unclear to me the degree to which this convergence of the yogic
body and medical body may be innovative in the context of Indian Buddhist tantra; in particular, I wonder about
the degree to which such convergence is present in The Wheel of Time Tantra.
101. See Kvaerne 1986 and Guenther 1993.
102. The moral dimension gets reinscribed in the third dimension of the ground of all existence, "compassion" or
"resonating concern" (thugs rje), but Samantabhadra as the primordial Buddha is said to have never done the
"slightest good."



The Shifting Terrain of the Tantric Bodies
the heart is the ultimate location of gnosis in the body -- also described as ground (gzhi), awareness (rig pa,
vidyā), or the Buddha-nucleas (de hzhin gshegs pa'i snying po, tathāgatagarbha) - which is repeatedly
characterized as the creative agency behind all conventional mental and physical structures. Its efflorescence
(rtsal) or radiation (gdangs) flows out from this center as the so-called ground-presencing (gzhi snang) in a
network of luminous channels ('od rtsa). The primary channel is located as a slender line of light often
termed the "pure crystal tube" (ka ti shel gyi sbug can) located within the center of the conventional central
channel; most importantly for the contemplative visions, it runs up into the head, where it divides into two
branches to run to the center of each eye. In some sources, the vitality channel (srog rtsa), or aorta, is
specified as the wider sheath containing the central channel. When this gnostic radiation flows into it under
the conditions of non-recognition, it gets channeled into ordinary modes of consciousness as the ground-
presencing is habituated into the distorted experiences ("khrul snang) of samsāra. In particular, the ordinary
mind's (sems, citta) conduit is said to exist in a special channel running between the heart and lungs. Tantric
psychology discusses psychic activity as being the conjunction of breath or winds and the mind, which is
imaged as a horse and its rider, the former blind and the latter crippled. This conduit allows awareness to
radiate out from the heart as the rider, and breath to enter from the lungs as the horse, such that from it
psychic activity ripples, or should we say gallops, outwards within the other channels crisscrossing the
body's interior. Its further movement within tends to get tracked in specific conduits, some of which
correspond to the particular type of being which one is (god, human, animal, etc.).
In this way, we can see that the entire nature of the subtle body's representation reinscribes Buddha-
nature discourse into the body's interior: gnosis creates the body on all its registers, whether the lived body,
body of experiences, emotional bodies, or that most problematic of all bodily phenomena, the mind.
Furthermore, the tradition's complex cosmogony of pure lands unfolding from absence is precisely
paralleled in its account of post-death visions as well as contemplative visions. The contemplative tradition
is unusual in its valorization of spontaneous image flow and in being principally based upon events
following death rather than preceding death. This cosmogonic process then is located within the body's
interior, with the subtle body physiology functioning to map out its events. The contemplative visions are
understood as an exteriorization of these internal processes, which itself evokes the image of the primordial
ground as a "youthful vase-body" (gzhon nu bum pali sku) holding the vast worlds within it until its seal is
rent open (rgya ral) and they flood forth into exteriority. Thus within this tradition the positive formation of
worlds is primarily a matter of the self-organization of pure lands. Since the visions in this case flow from
one's own deep interior through the eyes and into the sky, the practitioner viscerally experiences the power
of the tradition's exhortation to recognize all exterior appearances as "self-presenting" (rang snang), or
one's own manifestations
While the question of idealism raised by the tradition's interpretation of the relationship of appearances
and self on the model of dreaming is too difficult to deal with adequately in the present context, I would like
to point out both the immensity of self on this model and the complicated intersections of interior or exterior
that it entails. On the one hand, the self is the sky, as the practitioner views his/her emerging self in visions
stretching across the sky's expanse; on the other hand, the interior self is internally fissured into at least a
hundred divine figures and the ceaseless generation of an entire cosmos. A self vast enough to embrace the
sky and embrace all these pure and impure worlds within it is not a self of which one can assume an easy
103. Recent bodywork practitioners within the North America and Europe make related claims that reduplicating motor
activities of earlier evolutionary stages, such as of reptiles, can bring that corresponding neuropsychological states
to the fore, which remain latent within each of us. However that might be, this connection of the subtle body to
the six realms is linked to other practices in the tradition, such as that of the differentiation of cyclic existence
and transcendence" ('khor das ru shan) and that of eradicating the six realms of possible rebirth through
visualizing corresponding seed syllables placed within spots inside the body. The former involves crazily acting
out behaviors and mindsets of the six realms in a yogic context in order to bring those tendencies to exhaustion.
See Germano 1997 for further details.



David Germano
knowledge. In the reorientation of subtle body ideology and practice to throw the mind out into space rather
than into its own deep interiors, I would suggest the presence of a powerful post-tantric reformulation of
ancient Buddhist ideas of interdependence, or inter-subjectivity (rten 'brel. pratiryasamurpäda). Lest my
own rhetorical flourishes threaten to suggest a vague notion perhaps only tenuously related to the tradition
itself, I would like to also point out a very mundane manner in which to understand the practice's integration
of peri-personal with extra-personal spaces on a model drawn from neural science:104
Studies of the sense of touch and its cortical representation in the anterior regions of the parietal
lobe provide elementary examples of the internal representation of the body surface and of peri-
personal space. This representation is not fixed, but can be modified by experience. Analysis of
such modifications indicates that attentiveness is a factor in integrating the internal representation
of the body with vision and movement, a process that incorporates the representation of peri-
personal space with representations of extra-personal space. Here, body space becomes related to
visual space, whether actual, imagined, or remembered. Thus, a simple representation of self is
gradually enlarged into one that includes the external world, both real and imagined - the world in
which the self functions.
This passage assumes added significance when one notes that practitioners of the Seminal Heart visions
certainly lived within an environment where deeply interiorized subtle body meditations were widespread
and most likely frequently practiced by themselves as well. Ios Thus I assume the power of such incorporation
derives in part from the rhetorical or psychological reversal of these contemplative paradigms of deep
interiorizaton and control. In addition, it may be relevant to note common Tibetan strategies for magically
blocking off access to the body's interiors from dangerous demonic influences in the outer environment
and contrast it to this divine interpenetration of interior and exterior spaces that is allowed to playfully flow
across permeable boundaries.
Finally, similar to contemporary concerns with the ambiguous nexus of relationships surrounding
authors' creation of discourses and discourses' creation of authors, we can also question the significance of
the tradition's strong claim that the Buddhas constitute the individual with their self-presenting (rang snang)
displays, rather than individuals constituting Buddhas with the fabrications of deity yoga. To further pursue
such issues, I think it is important to look to the socio-political context of such rhetoric, as well as treat it
seriously as a theory of subjectivity that deserves to be more than mere fodder for inquiries that stake out
horizons, not put horizons at stake. I have in mind here Thomas Ots' recent intriguing study of the socio-
political conflicts that have surrounded the wildly popular - and politically controversial - Qi Gong
contemplative movements in the People's Republic of China. 17 Basing himself on the government's
avocation of quiet sitting Qi Gong and condemnation of the wildly cathartic "spontaneous movements” form
of Qi Gong, Ots argues that the former supports social and mental control over the lived body (leib), in line
with a general principle that bodily experiences are silenced by highly structured social domains. In contrast,
the latter practices rupture the culturally inscribed and constructed body with their invocation of highly
personalized and spontaneous events originating in the body itself. Without suggesting any direct parallels,
I would like to reemphasize the Seminal Heart's emphasis on sporítaneity within a broader tantric tradition
governed by highly structured visualization scripts, as well as how it teaches that external experience is an
exteriorization of bodily processes. With this in mind, or body, let us end with an interesting, seemingly
104. See Kandel 1995, pp. 345-6. I am indebted to Charles Herreshoff for drawing my attention to the significance of
this passage in the current context.
105. I base the latter assumption on the fact that hagiographic accounts of the main lineage masters are replete with
such references in terms of teachings received, transmitted and practiced.
106. See Desjarlais 1992, p. 46.
107. I would like to thank David Need for drawing my attention to this article.
108. In fact, the Seminal Heart tradition already in the eleventh century incorporates a very similar set of practices to
the Qi Gong "spontaneous movements," namely the "differentiation" practice alluded to above. In Germano 1997,



The Shifting Terrain of the Tantric Bodies
innocuous quote from a member of one of the most institutionally conservative of Tibetan traditions, the
Geluk (dge lugs), concerning the practice of the dark retreat in The Wheel of Time Tantra:10 "There are a
number of rather varying traditions concerning the actual meditation at this point. For example, one tradition
instructs that one should direct the mind to the sky. Whereas, Gyeltsab Je states that this is ridiculous because
the point of this practice is to draw the energies into the central channel. To bring the mind out, by directing
it to the sky, would obviously not be of any benefit." Obviously, this was in fact far from obvious to some
Tibetans. However we have now arrived at issues that, for the moment, must remain mere questions
ventured tentatively into the vast reaches of our own ignorance of the socio-political implications of tantric
discourse and practice.
Bibliography
Secondary references
Beyer, Stephen (1973). The Cult of Tara: Magic and Ritual In Tibet. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Cozort, Daniel (1986), Highest Yoga Tantra. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications.
Cozort, Daniel (1996). "Sadhana (sgrub thabs): Means of Achievement for Deity Yoga." In: Tibetan Literature, edited
by Jose Cabezon and Roger Jackson, pp. 331-343. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Csordas, Thomas J., ed. (1994). Embodiment and experience: The existential ground of culture and self. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Desjarlais, Robert (1992). Body and Emotion: The Aesthetics of illness and Healing. Philadelphia: The University of
Pennsylvania Press,
Dhargyey, Geshe Ngawang (1985). Kalacakra Tantra. Dharmsala: Library of Tibetan Works and Archives.
Dudjom Rinpoche, Jikdrel Yeshe Dorje (1991). The Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism. Volume One. Translated and
edited by Gyurme Dorje with the collaboration of Matthew Kapstein. Boston: Wisdom Publications.
Germano, David F (1994). "Architecture and Absence in the Secret Tantric History of the Great Perfection (rdzogs
chen)," The Journal of the international Association of Buddhist Studies, 17.2, pp. 203-335.
Germano, David F. (1997). "The Elements, Insanity, and Lettered Subjectivity." In: Religions of Tibet in Practice,
edited by Donald S. Lopez, Jr. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Germano, David F. (unpublished monograph). The Secret Transformation of Buddhist Tantra in Ancient Tibet.
Germano, David F. (monograph in progress). Mysticism and Rhetoric in the Great Perfection: The Transformation of
Buddhist Tantra in Ancient Tibet
Guenther, Herbert (1993). Ecstatic Spontaneity: Saraha's Three Cycles of Dohā. Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press.
Gyatso, Geshe Kelsang (1995). The Tantra Grounds and Paths: How to Enter, Progress on, and Complete the
Vajrayana Path. London: Tharpa Publications.
Harrison, Paul M. (1978). "Buddhānusmrti in the Pratyutpanna-Buddha Sammukhāvasthita-Samādhi-Sätra." Journal
of Indian Philosophy 6, pp. 35-57.
Hodge, Stephen (1994). "Considerations on the Dating and Geographical Origins of the Mahavairocanäbhisambodhi-
sūtra." In: The Buddhist Forum, Vol. III, pp. 57-83, edited by Tadeusz Skorupski and Ulrich Pagel. London:
School of Oriental and African Studies.
Hopkins, Jeffrey (1987). Deity Yoga. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications.
Hopkins, Jeffrey (1987a). Tantra in Tibet. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications
Hopkins, Jeffrey (1992), Walking through Walls. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications
Hopkins, Jeffrey (1996). "The Tibetan Genre of Doxography: Structuring a Worldview." In: Tibetan Literature, edited
by Jose Cabezon and Roger Jackson, pp. 170-186. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion.
Kandel, Eric R. with James H. Schwartz and Thomas M. Jerrel, eds. (1995). Essentials of Neural Science and Behavior.
Norwalk, Connecticut: Appleton and Lange.
Karmay, Samten (1988). The Great Perfection. London: E. J. Brill.
Kvaerne, Per (1986). An Anthology of Buddhist Tantric Songs, Bangkok: White Orchid Press.
Levin, David Michael (1988). The Opening of Vision. New York and London: Routledge.
I have analyzed these and other associated practices to show the consistent patterns of release, spontaneity and
intersubjectivity that run through them.
109. Dhargyey 1985, p. 134.



David Germano
Need, David (1993). The Guru's Mandala: Interpretation, Authority and Culture, MA thesis at the University of
Virginia.
Newman, John (1985). "A Brief History of the Kalachakra." In: The Wheel of Time, edited by Beth Simon, pp. 51-84.
Madison, WI: Deer Part Books.
Newman, John (1987). The Outer Wheel of Time: Vajrayāna Buddhist Cosmology in the Kālacakra Tantra. Ph.D. thesis
at the University of Wisconsin.
Ots, Thomas (1994). "The silenced body - the expressive Leib: on the dialectic of mind and life in Chinese cathartic
healing." In: Embodiment and Experience, edited by Thomas J. Csordas, pp. 116-138. London: Cambridge
University Press.
Samuel, Geoffrey (1989). "The Body in Buddhist and Hindu Tantra: Some Notes," Religion, 19. pp. 197-210.
Samuel, Geoffrey (1993). Civilized Shamans. Washington and London: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Sanderson, Alexis (1985). "Purity and Power among the Brahmans of Kashmir." In: The Category of the Person, pp.
190-216. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Snellgrove, David (1959). Hevajra Tantra. Two parts. London: Oxford University Press.
Snellgrove, David (1988). "Categories of Buddhist Tantras." In: Orientalia lossephi Tucci memoriae Dicata, edited by
G Gnoli and L. Lanciotti, pp. 1353-1390. Roma: Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente (Serie Orientale
Roma, LVI, 3).
Sopa, Geshe (1983). "An Excursus on the Subtle Body in Tantric Buddhism (Notes Contextualizing the Kālacakra,"
The Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies. 6.2, pp. 48-66.
Wayman, Alex (1957). "Contributions Regarding the Thirty-Two Characteristics of the Great Person," Sino-Indian
Studies, 5.3-4, pp. 243-60.
Wayman, Alex (1980) with ED. Lessing (translators). Introduction to the Buddhist Tantric Systems. New York: Samuel
Weiser, Inc.
Tibetan texts
The Esoteric Assembly Tantra (Guhyasamāja Tantra; gSang 'dus) of transcendental authorship. The Sanskrit text is
located in The Guhyasamaja Tantra, edited by Yukei Matsunaga. Osaka: Toho Shuppan, Inc. (1978). A Tibetan
translation is located in P#81 and TW442. Here and below, P and T refer respectively to the Peking and Toohoku
editions of the bKa' 'gyur and bsTan 'gyur.
The Experiential Transmission of Drugyelwa (Nyams brgyud rgyal ba'i phyag khrid) by Bru rje rgyal ba g.yung drung.
It is found in the Snyan rgyud nam mkha' 'phrul mdzod drang nges skor and Zhang chung snyan rgyud skor
compiled by Sherab Wangyal from the xylographic prints from Man ri blocks. Delhi, 1972. 1-Tib 72-902363.
The (Glorious) Wheel of Time Tantra (dPal dus kyi 'khor lo: Srikālacakra) of transcendental authorship. For Tibetan,
Sanskrit and Mongolian editions, see R. Vira and L. Chandra, The Kālacakra Tantra and Other Texts, Satapitaka
Series, vols. 69-70. New Delhi: Sarasvati Vihar (1966). The Sanskrit portion is in part 1, fols. 332-378. A Tibetan
translation is located in T#362, DZ vol. 10, and GDKT vol. 17, nos. 97-8. See also the edition contained in The
Collected Works of Bu-ston, part I (KA), Lokesh Chandra (ed.). New Delhi: International Academy of Indian
Culture, 1965.
A General Presentation of the Classes of Tantra (rGyud sde spyi'i mam par gzhag pa rgyas par brjod) by Khedrub Je.
See Wayman (1980) for an edition of the Tibetan text with a preliminary translation.
The Great Stages of Mantra (sNgags rim chen mo) by Tsongkhapa. mTsho sngon, Qinghai: m Tsho sngon mi rigs dpe
skrun khang (1990). All references are to the partial translations in Hopkins
Hail Vajra Tantra (Kye rdo rje or brTag gnyis; Hevajra tantra) of transcendental authorship. A Tibetan translation is
located in P#10 and T#417-418. An English translation can be found in Snellgrove (1959), which includes an
edition of the Sanskrit and Tibetan texts.
Introduction to the Lighting-up of the Expanse (dByings snang ngo sprod) by Longchenpa. This text is located in The
Seminal Quintessence of the dūkinis (vol. 3, pp. 116-125). See The Seminal Heart in Four Parts.
The Nucleus of Mystery Tantra (Guhyagarbha Tantra: gSang ba snying po). A Tibetan translation is located in K 187
See Dorje (1987) for a critical edition of the Tibetan (the Sanskrit original no longer exists) and translation into
English. The Sanskrit original is currently unavailable to us, and may be lost forever, though its original existence
is hardly controversial despite traditional sectarian polemics in Tibet over the years. See Dispelling Darkness
Throughout the Ten Directions for Longchenpa's main commentary on this critical Tantra, which Dorje has also
translated in his thesis.



The Shifting Terrain of the Tantric Bodies
83
The Profound Doctrine of Wisdom's Natural Freedom (in Encountering) the Peaceful and Wrathful Deities (Zab chos
zhi khro dgongs pa rang grol) by Karma Lingpa. Given the immense number of editions of this popular work, I
have cited the individual titles so they can be easily located in any edition. The most comprehensive edition to
appear to date is a three volume edition published by Sherab Lama in Delhi (1975-6; I.Tib 75-903780). It also
appears in volume four of The Storehouse of Precious Treasures (pp. 1-281). Unless otherwise specified, all
citations are from a 549 page small sized Tibetan edition printed on January first 1985 in India and entitled Zab
chos zhi khro dgongs pa rang grol las, bar do thos grol cher mo. See Freemantle (1987) and Thurman (1993) for
English translations of these core texts, which are known as Liberation through Hearing in the Intermediate State
but have become well known in the English language materials as The Tibetan Book of the Dead.
The Seminal Heart in Four Parts by miscellaneous authors (Nying this wa bzhi). All page references are from the
eleven volutne edition, New Delhi, published by Trulku Tsewang, Jamyang and L. Tashi (1971). The current
redaction has five separate collections of texts, despite its title indicating "four" parts:
1. The Seminal Quintessence of the Spiritual Master by Longchenpa (Bla ma yang tig, vols. 1;
abbreviation LYT).
2. The Seminal Heart of the Sky Dancer by Padmasambhava (mKha''gro saying thig, vols. 2-3; abbreviation KGNT).
3. The Seminal Quintessence of the Sky Dancer by Longchenpa (mKha' 'gro yang tig, vols. 4-6;
abbreviation KGYT).
4. The Seminal Heart of Vimalamitra by Vimalamitra and other carly Great Perfection Masters (Bi ma snying
thig, vols. 7-9, abbreviation BMNT).
5. The Seminal Quintessence of the Profound by Longchenpa (Zab mo yung tig, vols, 10-11, abbreviation ZYT)
The Seven Treasuries (mDzod chen bdun) by Longchenpa. All page references are to the six volume edition, Gangtok,
Sikkim, published by Sherab Gyaltsen and Khyentse Labrang (1983), I-Tib 83-905058. Another edition was
published by Dodrup Chen Rinpoche, Gangtok, Sikkim (c. 1969). There is also a xylographic edition currently
available from Degay Publishing House, in East Tibet. The individual seven titles are as follows:
1. The Wish-Fulfilling Treasury (Yid bzhin mdzod: YZD).
2. The Treasury of Esoteric Precepts (Man ngag mdzod; MND).
3. The Treasury of Spiritual Systems (Grub mtha' mdzod; GTD).
4. The Treasury of the Supreme Vehicle (Theg mchog mdzod; TCD).
5. The Treasury of Words and Meanings (Tshig don ndod: TDD).
6. The Treasury of Reality's Expanse (Chos dbyings mdzod; CBD).
7. The Treasury of the Precious Abiding Reality (gNaslugs mdzod: NLD).
The Seventeen Tantras (rGyud bcu bdun) of transcendental authorship. Published in a three-volume edition based on
the Adzom blocks, New Delhi: Sanje Dorje, 1973. This collection of tantras is located in most editions of The
Collected Tantras of the Ancient (rNying ma rgyud 'hum): however, in the present context I have provided page
references for individual citations from only the separately published three-volume edition. However, for
comparative purposes, I have also provided below the pagination for the texts' location in the Tshamdrak
(mrshams brag) edition of The Collected Tantras of the Ancients, an edition printed by the National Library, Royal
Government of Bhutan, Thimphu, Bhutan, 1982 (Bhu-Tib 82-902 165). "Ab" refers to the Adzom edition, and
"Tb" refers to the Tshamdrak edition. The individual titles are as follows (I have translated the titles in standard
abbreviated forms, but given the full title in the Tibetan):
1. The Tantra of Unimpeded Sound (Rin po che 'byung bar byed pa sgra thal 'gyur chen po'i rgyud: Th12 1-173,
Abl 1-205).
2. The Tantra of Exquisite Auspiciousness (bkra shis mdzes Idan chen po'i rgyud: Th12 173-193, Ab1 207-232).
3. The Tantra of All Good's Enlightened Spirit Mirror (Kun tu bzang po thugs kyi me long gi rgyud; Tb12 245-
280, Abi 233-280).
4. The Blazing Lamp Tantra (sGron ma 'bar ba'i rgyud; Tb12 467-491, Abl 281-313).
5. The Tantra of the Adamantine Hero's Heart-Mirror (rDo nje sems dpa' snying gi me long gi rgyud; Tb12 193-
245. Ab1 315-388).
6. The Tantra of Self-Arising Awareness (Rig pa rang shar chen po'i rgyud; Th11 323-696, Ab1 389-855).
7. The Inlaid Jewels Tantra (Nor bu phra bkod rang gi don thans cad gsal bar byed pa'i rgyud; Tb12 712-777,
Ab2 1-75).
8. The Tantra of the Pointing Our Introduction (Ngo sprod rin po che spras pa' zhing khams bstan pa'i rgyud;
Tb12 280-304, Ab2 77-109).
9. The Six Spaces Tantra (Kun tu bzang po klong drug pa'i rgyud: Tb12 394.467. Ab2 111-214).



David Germano
10.The Great Esoteric Unwritten Tantra (Yi ge med pa'i gsang ba ng yud chen po; Tb11 298-322. Ab2 215-244).
11. The Tantra of the Lion's Perfect Dynamism (Seng ge rtsal rdzogs chen po'i rgyud: Tb12 560-712. Ab2
245-415).
12. The Garland of Precious Pearls Tantra (Mu tig rin po che phreng ba'i rgyud: Tb12 304-393, Ab2 417-537).
13. The Tantra of Naturally Free Awareness (Rig pa rang grol chen po thams cad 'grol ba'i rgyud: Tb11 699-757,
Ab3 1-72
14. The Tantra of Overflowing Preciousness (Rin chen spungs pa yon tan chen po ston pa rgyud kyi rgyal po; Tbil
757-788, Ab3 73-114).
15.The Blazing Relics Tantra (dPal nam mkha' med pa'i sku gdung 'har ba chen po'i rgyud; Tb11 788-815, Ab3
115-151).
16.The Tantra of the Sun and Moon's Intimate Union (Nyi ma dang zla ba zla kha sbyor ba chen po gsang ba'i
rgyud; Tb12 491-560, Ab3 152-233).
17. The Self-Emerging Perfection Tantra (sku thams cad kyi snang ba ston pu dbang rdzogs pa rang byung chen
po'i rgyud; Th11 1-298, Ab3 235-558).



P.T. 7A, P.T. 108, P.T. 240 AND BEIJING BSTAN ÄGYUR 3489:
ANCIENT TIBETAN RITUALS DEDICATED TO VAIROCANA
Amy Heller
(Nyon)
E. Gene Smith has been most influential in Tibetan studies in many ways yet foremost among his scholarly
achievements remains his vast bibliographic research throughout Asia to discover Tibetan xylographs and
manuscripts. His efforts resulted in their publication and inclusion in the United States Library of Congress
and its catalogue, thereby accessible to Tibetans and to scholars of Tibetology for generations to come. By
virtue of his research, E. Gene Smith may justly be compared to the heroic explorers such as Paul Pelliot
who recovered the Tibetan manuscripts from Dunhuang, now preserved for future scholars in the
Bibliothèque Nationale de France. In a small gesture of homage, here will be presented a brief analysis and
texts of two unpublished rituals for Vairocana from the Dunhuang manuscripts now in Paris,
The importance of the cult of Vairocana in Tibet during the sPu rgyal dynasty has been well demonstrated
by previous studies based on ancient artistic representations of Vairocana extant in the twentieth century and
on research of the translations made during this period. We propose to present preliminary analysis here of
two Dunhuang manuscripts which constitute a ritual of praise to Vairocana and his entourage of the eight
Bodhisattvas (P.T. 7a, P.T. 108) and a ritual dedicated to a mandala of Vairocana (P.T. 240), with reference
to the description of Vairocana developed in a ritual text attributed to Gyal ba'i 'od, one of the authors
mentioned in the early ninth century IDan kar catalogue.
The relationship of these rituals to the canonical cycles remains to be established. The translation of the
Sarvatathāgatatattvasamgraha (STTS) for the Vajradhātu cycle was accomplished in Chinese in 753 A.D. in
the Hexi corridor region by Amoghavajra (705-774). The Tibetan translation of the
Sarvadurgatiparisodhana (SDPS) tantra followed soon after, as did the Vairocanabhisambodhi tantra (VAT),
both of which are listed in the IDan kar catalogue; the iconography of Vairocana is distinct in each of these
textual traditions. Although today the extant translation of the STTS is that accomplished by Rin chen bzang
po (958-1055), previous studies indicate that a version of the STTS was known in Tibet during the sPu rgyal
dynastic period. Dating from late eighth to late ninth century, four ancient major artistic representations of
1. This paper is adapted from my presentation at the 1997 Beijing Tibetology Seminar and revised for the 1999 IABS
Lausanne conference, which I attended thanks to support from the C.N.R.S., Paris, UMR 8047.
2. See in particular H.E. Richardson, "The Cult of Vairocana in Early Tibet," in Tadeusz Skorupski, ed., Indo-Tibetan
Studies. Tring: The Institute of Buddhist Studies (Buddhica Britannica. II), 1990, pp. 271-274; Tadeusz Skorupski,
The Sarvadurgatiparisodhana Tantra - Elimination of All Evil Destinies. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1983; Alex
Wayman and Ryujun Tajima, The Enlightenment of Vairucana. Vol. 1: Study of the Vairocanabhisambodhitantra
(by A. Wayman); vol. 2. Study of the Mahăvairocana-Sūtra (by R. Tajima). Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass (Buddhist
Tradition Series, 18), repr. 1992; and, most recently, Matthew T. Kapstein, The Tibetan Assimilation of Buddhism
- Conversion, Contestation, and Memory. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000
3. Gyal ba'i 'od is listed in the IDan kar catalogue as author of the Byang chubkyisemis sgom pa (609), see Marcelle
Lalou, "Contribution à la bibliographie du Kanjur et du Tanjur - Les textes bouddhiques au temps du roi Khri-sron-
Ide-bcan," Journal Asiatique, CCXLI, 3 (1953), pp. 313-353. Gyal ba'i 'od is the author of Beijing bsTan 'gyur
No. 3489: Nam par snang mdzad kyi sgru pa'i thabs kyi cho ga.
4. Lalou, op. cit., nos. 321, 322, 323, 324.
5. See Lalou, op.cit, no. 319 in the category of gSang sigags kyi gyud: Gyud kun las btus pa, which bears a title
reminiscent of the Tibetan for STTS. I thank Matthew Kapstein for discussion (1997) of the hypothesis of this text
as an earlier version of the STTS, and refer the reader to his recent volume, The Tibetan Assimilation of Buddhism
(see above), ch. 4: "The Royal Conversion to Buddhism Reconsidered," pp. 51-68. On the basis of his analysis of
Stein No. 367 II, Kimiaki Tanaka presented very convincing evidence of the translation of the STTS during the snga



86
Amy Heller
Vairocana with eight Bodhisattva attendants are attributed to Tibetan patronage during this period: the rock
sculptures of IDan ma brag (816 A.D.), the sculptures of 'Bis mda' lha khang (80476 A.D.), the mural
paintings of Yulin cave 25, and a portable painting on silk (the latter two are both attributed to the Tibetan
occupation of Dunhuang 787-866 A.D.),! but the Tibetan liturgical cycle which inspired these artistic
representations had not hitherto been identified. The mystery is here potentially elucidated by the ritual in
praise of Vairocana and the eight Bodhisattvas in texts P.T. 7a and P.T. 108.
The Vairocana teachings continued to develop as evidenced by P.T. 242, a complex successsion of
mandala centered on Vairocana and series of emanations of Bodhisattvas as well as eight nāga, eight lha
chen. This ritual is linked by internal reference to the Vajradhatu cycle due to the residence of Vairocana in
the realm named rdo rje dbyings. Vairocana is the dharmakäya, chos kyi sku, and here appears as a
"generator" of the cosmos.
The center of the palm of the hand of Bhagavät Vairocana is the ocean of the phenomenal worlds and
in each of these phenomenal worlds resides a Tathāgata, and for each of these Tathāgata is a Bodhisattva. So
they abide. To each of these Bodhisattvas, by the ocean of Buddhas is shown the ocean of Dharma. From
the hairs on the face of Vairocana emanates the brilliant radiance of all the ocean of Buddhas of the
Tathāgata.
The mandala described in P.T. 240 is far more succinct. Here Vairocana is the center of a mandala of
five families of Jina, with the four yum of the other Jina and four tha mo offering goddesses attendants
surrounding him. Rather than residing in the Vajradhātu, Vairocana and his attendants are in a divine palace
of jewels, rin chen gzhal yas sprul khang. But other elements of this ritual recall the central mandala of the
five Jina Vajradhātu mandala of the STTS as we will discuss below. In the Vajradhātu mandala of clay statues
in the gNas mjal che mo cave west of Kampa Dzong, the throne of Vairocana is surrounded by small
sculpted symbols for each of the four yum, but eight offering goddesses face Vairocana. This arrangment
bears much comparison with the configuration of the clay statues of the STTS mandala of Tabo,' stemming
from Rin chen bzang po's translations of the STTS and its commentaries. However, among the eight
Bodhisattvas represented at Bis mda', the statue inscribed with name of Spyan ras gzigs, Tibetan name for
Avalokitesvara, holds a vase not a lotus. This indicates that several styles of representation and several
systems of iconography were known and used simultaneously for Vairocana and the eight Bodhisattvas.
Comparison reveals that the two textual fragments recovered from Dunhuang, P.T. 7a and P.T. 108, are
in fact the same ritual. PT. 108 gives the initial verses of P.T. 7a which is truncated, PT. 108 appears
complete, while P.T. Ta has an additional stanza. In the following paragraphs, the two texts are conjoined.
dar in his presentation at the 1998 IATS, Bloomington seminar: "The Aryatattvasangrahasādhanopāyika and
Vajrahümkārasādhanopāyika discovered at Dunhuang," forthcoming in the proceedings of this seminar.
6. These artistic representations and the rock inscriptions of historic or liturgical texts nearby them were the subject
of my research summarized in Amy Heller, "Buddhist Images and Rock Inscriptions from Eastern Tibet, VIIIth to
Xth Century, Part IV," Proceedings of the International Association of Tibetan Studies, Graz, 1997, pp. 385-403.
7. PT 242, line 4: bcom Idan 'das rnam par snang mdzad kyi phyag gi mthil gyi snying po 'fig rten gyi 'khams rgya
misho zhes hva ba gnas sol jig rten gyi 'khams de re re la yang/ de bzhin gshegs pa re re bzhugs sol de bzhen
gshagy pa re re la yang byang chub sems pa re re molde bzhugs sol byang chub sems pa re re la yang sangs rgyas
rgya mtshos chos rgya mtsho sten/?bstan) to/ mnam par snang mdzad zhal gyi mdzod spu nas/ da bzhin gshegs pa'i
mtshan sangs rgyas rgya misho thams cad kyi 'od rah tu snang ba zhes bya ba bzhugs so. It is beyond the scope of
the present article to discuss in detail P.T. 242 as the system of successive emanations is very complex and appears
to be in related to the Avatarhsaka liturgy for the aspect Nam par snang mdzad Thub pa gangs chen mtsho rgyal
(see note 12). I hope to pursue study of this text in the future,
8. For this sculptural Vajradhātu mandala, see Amy Heller, "The Caves of gNas mjal che mo," in Deborah E.
Klimburg-Salter and Eva Allinger, eds., The Inner Asian International Style, 12th-14th Centuries. Wien: WÖAW,
1998, pp. 133-150.
9. See Christian Luczanits, "The Clay Sculptures," in Deborah E. Klimburg-Salter, ed., Tabo: A Lamp for the Kingdom
- Early Indo-Tibetan Buddhist Art in the Western Himalaya. Milano, Skira, 1997, pp. 189-205.



P.T. 7A, PT. 108, P.T. 240 and Beijing bsTan 'gyur 3489
Vairocana is lord of the Akaniştha 'og min paradise. Vairocana is not described physically using the specific
translations of Indian Buddhist terminology of mudrā or asanā, but he is described in "normal" Tibetan
language. He is the center of a mandala, he is in perfect calm, in meditative mood, mnyam hzhag, he does
not move, nor speak. This description of his meditative state contrasts very much with the Tibetan term for
meditative gesture, which is found in the VAT and in Gyal ba'i 'od's sadhana ritual, Chos kyi dbyings kyi
phyag rgya, Sanskrit: dharmadhātu mudrā. Although this terminology is not used in the two fragments, the
position or gesture of the hands appears to be the same. The description of this gesture is supplied by Rgyal
ba'i 'od as the two hands extended, the thumb tips meeting inwards, the index held tightly one above the
other, which is the hand position habitually called samadhi or dhyāna mudra. In P.T. 108/7a, Vairocana is
described as the yid bzhin nor bu rin chen, "the jewel of wish fulfilling jewels," probably a reference to a
sambhogakāya representation in jewels and royal garments as described in VAT. In contrast, Rgyal ba'i 'od's
text, fol. 361b, stipulates that the Bhagavät Vairocana may be venerated either in the golden body and
attributes of royalty (crown, diadem, braid, upper and lower garments of silk) or in the form and color of
Śäkyamuni, with monastic robes: pad ma seng ge gdan de la sangs rgyas bcom Idan 'das rnam par snang
mdzad gser gyi kha dog thor tshugs dang dbu rgyan dang cod pan can dar la'i stod g.yogs dang smad g.yogs
can nam/ shakya thub pa'i cha byed dang kha dog dang dbyibs ji skad du grags par 'ang rung ste. This text
thus documents representation of Vairocana in either the aspect of nirmänukāya or sambhogakāva,
whichever is suitable for the practioner.
In the Bis mda temple, at the center of the eight Bodhisattvas statues, the statue of Vairocana is
sculpted wearing the heavy robes with long sleeves, crown and boots of the btsan po, the Tibetan sovereign,
as known from contemporary paintings of the btsan po and his attendants, such as in the Dunhuang cave
159. This 'Bis mda' Vairocana statue somewhat tends to amalgamate the concepts of nirmānakāya - the
representation in human body - and the sambhogakāya representation in the ideal body of bliss wearing
royal garments, which are usually Indian garments in light, diaphanous Indian silks for scarves, blouse and
pants. Among Buddhist countries, to my knowledge, only in Tibet does one find representations of Buddha
wearing boots! This distinctive and ancient iconography of Vairocana at 'Bis-mda' has been identified as
the Vairocana of the Glacier Lake (rnam par snang mdzad gangs can mtsho)." It partially corresponds to the
description made by Bu ston in his Chos 'byung:
de'ang rnam snang gangs can mtsho'i phyag gi mthil gyi rdul phran goig la gnas shing rnam snang
de longs skur 'dod dol ngo bo nges pa mtshan dpes brgyan pa 'khor nges pa sa bcu'i byang sems/
longs spyod nges pa theg chen gyi chos la rdzogs par longs spyod pal de nges pa rgyun mi chad pa'o/
Bu ston describes Vairocana of the Glacier Lake as having Vairocana in the desired from as sambhogakāva
in a minute part of the open palm of his hand, the latter is adorned with the characteristic signs of the
Buddha, surrounded by Bodhisattva of the ten fields. Thus the rNam snang gangs can mtsho has his hands
in dhyānamudrā to accommodate Vairocana and the ten Bodhisattva - but the mudrā of the second Vairocana
10. Gyal ba'i 'od, bs Tan 'gyur no. 3489, Rnam par snang mdzad kyi sgrub pa'i thabs kyi chog ga, Ngu, fols. 358-368.
Description of the mudrā on fol. 361a: chos kyi dbyings kyi phyag rgya ... ni lag pa gnyis khu tshur bcangs la nithe
bo gnyis nang du bcugs ste mdzub mo gnyis bsgreng ngo (Daisetsu T. Suzuki, ed., The Tibetan Tripitaka. Peking
Edition. Tokyo: Tibetan Tripitaka Research Institute, 1957: bsTan 'gyur, rgyud 'grel, vol. 77: pp. 223-229). I thank
Ven. m Tshan zhabs Rin po che of Zürich for his help in the interpretation of Gyal ba'i 'od's text. For samadhi
mudrā, the SDPS uses the term ting 'dzin phyag rgya according to the description of Kun rig Vairocana in
Skorupski, op. cit., 1983, pp. 311-313.
u. See Samten G Karmay, p. 478 in "Inscriptions Dating from the Reign of brsan po Khri IDe-srong-btsan," in
Proceedings of the International Association of Tibetan Studies, Graz: 1997, pp. 477-486. In personal
correspondence S. Karmay has explained his source for this identification as his informant, gDugs dkar Tshe Ring.
My thanks to Gregor Verhufen for reference to his study of 'Bis-mda': gDugs dkar Tshe Ring, "Yul shul 'bis khor
mnam snang gtsug lag khang gi bod btsan po'i dus kyi brag brkos lha sku yi ge la yang bskyar dpvad pa," in Zangzu
Lishi Zongjian Yanjiu: Beijing: Zhong Guo Zang Xue Chu, 1996. pp. 283-328



Amy Heller
is not indicated, although it is stated that in this sambhogakāya manifestation, he is the completely perfected
Dharma of Mahāyāna.!
In P.T. 7a and P.T. 108, the eight Bodhisattvas are named and described by color, for example,
Avalokiteſvara is white. It is not certain whether the colors and attributes were constant in the liturgy of the
period, for the statue of Avalokitesvara at *Bis mda' has gold body color (but this is probably due to a later
over-painting of color) but as mentioned above, the attribute held is a vase, which is not his typical lotus
attribute of later liturgy. In P.T. 7a and 108 Avalokiteſvara is textually described as white "like a glacier
mountain" (gangs ri 'dra), which is certainly a very Tibetan literary metaphor. Although no Sanskrit
antecedent text for this ritual has been found, this metaphor implies that the Tibetan authors were already
adapting Buddhist literature to the Tibetan concepts and not simply translating verbatim. In addition,
Avalokitesvara is also compared to a lotus, but the descriptions of the other Bodhisattvas are in general less
specific for attributes.
As the members of the group of eight Bodhisattvas can vary considerably, it is pertinent to list those
named in P.T. 7a and P.T. 108: Avalokiteſvara, Maitreya, Akasagarbha, Samantabhadra, Vajrapāņi, Manjusri,
Sarvanīvaranaviskambin, Kşitigarbha. Notably absent from the list of P.T. 7a/108 is Vajrasattva who does
figure among the inscribed names of the eight Bodhisattvas surrounding Vairocana in the British Museum
painting inv. 50.Ch.0074 recovered by Sir Aurel Stein from Dunhuang."
The description of Marcelle Lalou had noted P.T. 7a as a group of texts among which item 3 is the rNam
par snang mdzad 'khor dang bcas pa la bstod pa, of which the beginning is missing. Her description of P.T.
108 indicated a fragment composed of two texts, the first of which is Sangs rgyas bcom ldan 'das ram par
snang mdzad 'khor dang bcas pa la bstod pa. The two titles are equivalent: "Hymn of praise to Buddha
Vairocana and his entourage."14
Transcription of P.T. 108 and P.T. 7a
P.T. 108
sangs rgyas bcom ldan 'das rnam par snang mdzad 'khor dang bcas la bstod pa'rnam par snang
mdzad bcom ldan 'das/ og myin mnga' bdag chos kyi rjel sa bcu brnyes pa'i dkyil 'khor na/ myi gsung
myi g.yo mnyam hzhag kyang/ yid hzhin nor bu rin chen liar/ hsams pa isam gyis dngos grub cing/bltas
pa tsam gyis re bskong ba/ mgon po'i mchog la phyag 'tshal lol spyan ras gzigs dbang 'jigs rten mgon/
thub pa'i dang po spyi
P.T. 7a
Line 1
gtsug brgyan/sku mdog dkar gsal gangs ri 'dra/ nyon mongs myi gos pad ma bzhin/thugs rje che zhing
mthu ldan pa/ sems can nyam thay phongs dgu yis/ dran na sdug bsngal zhi mdzad pal mgon du gyur
pa la phyag 'tshal lol myi 'pham dga'Idan chos kyi rjel ye shes pha rol phyin rdzogs tel chos kyi sprin
la mnga' brnyhes zhing/ thams cad mkhyen du tshe gcig thogs/ dus ngan tha ma lo bcu'i tshel mngon
sprul dge bcu
Line 2
rims bstan nas/ ring por myi thogs 'chang rgya ba/ mgon du gyur la phyag tshal lo/ nam mkha'i snying
po skyon mi gos/dgongs pa rgya che nam mkha' bzhin/ sems can rab 'byam mang don dul 'jig rten nam
12. See Bu ston, bDe har gshegs pa'i bstan pa'i gsal byed chos kyi 'byung gnas gsung rab rin po che'i mdzod, mTsho
sngon mi rigs par khang, 1987, p. 89 and E. Obermiller, History of Buddhism by Bu-ston, Heidelberg, 1931, p. 132.
My translation differs from that of Obermiller, who did not recognize the specific aspect of Vairocana as Nam
snang gangs can mtsho rgyal.
13. See M. Yoritomi, "An Iconographic Study of the Eight Bodhisattvas in Tibet," in Skorupski, op.cit., 1990,
Pp. 323-332.
14. Marcelle Lalou, Inventaire des manuscrits tibétains de Touen Houang conservés à la Bibliothèque Nationale, Fonds
Pelliot tibétain, vol. I. Paris: Maisonneuve, 1939.



PT. 7A, P.T. 108, P.T. 240 and Beijing bsTan 'gyur 3489
89
mkha' mthas klas par/ bskal pa chen po dpag myed du/ 'khor bas yongs su myi skyo bar/ sgrub pa nam
mkha' mthas 'jal bal mgon du gyur la phyag tshal lo/ rgyal sras thubo
Line 3
kun tu bzang/ snga dus bskal pa mang po nas/ dri ma'i skyon rnams yongs bsal cing/ las dang nyon
mongs ci tsam bya/ dgongs bzhin srid pa yongs dzin cing/hzang po spyod pa rgya chen gyis/ 'gro ba
mtha' dag rnam 'grol ba/ mgon du gyur la phyag tshal lo/ phyag na rdo rje gsang ba'i bdag/ rigs
sngags byin rlabs kun gyi bla/ rdzu 'phrul mthu stobs bsam myi khyab/ hdud dang bgegs kyis yongs
Line 4
myi rje/ ri rab rtse la mthu brten tel lha klu gnod sbyin brul phab nas/ 'byung po kun la mnga'mdzad
pa/ mgon du gyur la phyag Tshal lo/dpal gyi dam pa 'jam pa'i dbyangs/1shogs chen rnam gnyisyongs
bskangs pas/bsod nams tshogs kyis mdzes dgur ldan/ ye shes tshogs kyis mkhyen pa 'phags/sku gsung
thugs rnams yongs dag pas/ 'jam mnyen snyen pa phun sum tshogs/
Line 5
mthong thos thams cad yid 'dul pa mgon du gyur la phyag 'tshal lol sgrib pa thams cad rnam sel pal
jig rten 'dren pa'i shes rab kyis/lta ba'i dra ba mang bsal tel bdag myed rnam gnyis rab rtogs pas/
sgrib pa gnyis po yongs sel cing/ gzhan yang yang dag lha lam dumam par bkod pa dge bshes mchog/
mgon du gyur la phyag 'tshal lol sa'i snying po yongs kyi rten/dge ba'i lo tog
Line 6
kun kyi gzhi/ brtson 'grus go cha myi shigs sra/ rkyen dan dus bzhin byin kyis rlob/khyod la brten te
bsgrubs so 'tshalsdug bsngal zad pa'i mihar gyur pas/ snying po yang dag thob mdzad pa/mgon du
gyur la phyag 'tshal lol mam par snang mdzad 'khor dang bcas pa la bstod pa rdzogs sol
While PT. 107 concludes after the evocation of Sa'i snying po in line 6, P.T. 108 continues as follows until
the end of the sheet of paper, and then remains incomplete
phags pa dri ma myed pa grags/thams la mkhas pa mchog brnyes pas/ khyim bdag chen po gzugs ston
yang/ shes rab pha rol phyin bsgomstel dngos po ji bzhin yongs mkhyen pas/ 'du 'dzi kun la rab dben
cing/ "jig rten skyon ris/myi chags pa/ mgon du gyur la phyag 'shal lol thugs rje chen po rin can dpal/
sku gsung thugs kyang rin cen tel myi skyo las la myi dgongs par/ phyag na rin cen rab gthong ba/shal
nas rin cen chos ston cing/ sangs rgyas rin cen thob par mdzad/rin cen thams cad 'byung ba'i gnas/ mgon
du gyur la phag ''shal lo/ mthu chen khams gsum rnam par rgyal/ rnam thar gsum po rab bsgoms pas/
srid pa gsum gyi nyon mongs bsal/dpa' brtan mthu stobs che dang Idan/ do Ishol sdog (end of sheet).
Transcription of P.T. 240
We next refer to the text of P.T. 240, which for all apparent purposes is a text which combines elements of
the vocabulary and iconographic systems of the two tantra VAT and STTS. Vairocana is gold, like the VAT,
not white as in the STTS. Like P.T. 108 and 7A, Vairocana is compared to a "wish fulfilling jewel" (vid bzhin
nor bu). In P.T. 240, his mudrå however is the bodhyagri mudrā, byang chub mchog gi phyag rgya. This
mudrā is textually documented in the extant liturgy of the STTS but does not figure in the VAT or in Rgyal
ba'i 'od's composition as retained in the bsTan 'gyur. In Indian iconography and later Tibetan iconography,
the bodhyagri mudrā is understood as the gesture where the index of left hand is clasped by the five fingers
of the right hand. But the term byang chub mchog giphyag rgya literally signifies the gesture of the highest
enlightenment." It does not describe how to position the hands. This may have been a factor leading to a
certain degree of uncertainty in artistic representations. Is the "best enlightenment" characterized by the
clasping gesture or the samadhi mudrā where one hand lies atop the other, as explained by Rgyal ba'i 'od's
ritual and the VAT? The variant hand positions of representations of Vairocana do not permit clear
understanding at present of how the understanding of the term byang chub mchog gi phyag rgya may have
varied in different lands and different periods. It is to be hoped that future documentation may help to
establish chronology or textual or artistic context in which the differentiation may be clarified. The
Vajradhātu mandala is characterized by the five Buddha families, while VAT has three or five families. P.T.
240 has 5 families, rigs Inga sangs rgyas, with a more elaborate description of their attributes and colors



Amy Heller
than P.T. 7a or PT 108. In PT: 240, colors and attributes follow the later Vajradhätu as known from Rin chen
bzang po's translation of STTS. For example, in the west (fols. 3b-4a of text), the yum of the Lotus family
is red in color, holding the lotus and a jewel. Still, there is a degree of literary innovation, such as the yum
of the Vajra family; this is the female deity Locana being compared to a crystal brilliance (fol. 1b: shel gyi
gzil shel gyi 'od), as are several other female deities in this ritual.
P.T. 240
Fol. 1
dpal rdo rje sems pa' la phyag Ishal lo/ rigs Inga sangs rgyas 'khor dang bcas pa thams cad la phyag
tshal lo/ rdo rje 'dzin pa thams cad la phyag 'tshal lo ... rin cen gzhal yas sprul khang na/ dbus kyi nyi
ma'i dkyil 'khor na/ (fol. 1b) dpal cen rnam par snang mdzad bzhugs/ gser mdog ri rab byang gi ngos/
longs spyod rdzogs sku yid bzhin gther/ byang cub mchog gi phyag rgya tshull 'dir gshegs mchod pa
dam pa bzhes/ nye gnas dbyings ma' bzhi bzhugs pa/ shar kyi
Fol. 2
phyogs na bzhugs pa nil rdo rje rigs kyi yum yin te dpal gyi dam pa lotsanal dkar la rtsa dmar mdangs
dang Idan/ shel kyi gzi dang mdog 'dram/ sna tshog sa rgyan gyis rab du brgyan/ 'od kyi 'phrang bas
rnam par (fol. 2b) klubs/ spyan gyi dam pa sku bzhugs tel 8.yon kyi phyag na spyan yang 'dzin/ g.yas
kyi phyag na rdo rje hsnams/ zla ha'i dkhyil 'khor bdan la bzhugs/ rdo rje rigs kyi dam bskul ba/ 'dir
gshegs mchod pa dam pa bzhes/lho'i phyogs na bzhegs pa ni/ rin cen yum
Fol. 3
yi rigs kyi yum yin tel dpal gyi dam pa ma maki nam ka'i mdangs dang ldan pa'i/be du rya mdog dram
rin chen sprul pa'i rgyan dang Idan/sna tshogs rin cen mdzod kyi gther/ g.yas kyi phyag ba rin cen
bsnams/ g.yon kyi phyag na yid bzhin 'dzin/ zla ba'i dkhyil 'khor (fol. 3b) gdan la bzhugs/ rin cen rigs
kyi dam bskul bal'dir gshegs mchod pa dam pa bzhes/ nub kyi phyogs na bzhugs pa ni pad mo rigs
kyi yum yin tel dpal gyi dam pa na bza'dkar/ mdog dmar pad mo ra ga 'drayid bzhin Idan pa'i rgyan
gyis gzhugs/shi
Fol. 4
na du gsal ba'i yid bzhin mdzad/ g.yas kyi phyogs na' pad ma bsnams/ g.yon gyi phyag na yid bzhin
'dzin/ zla ba'i dkyil 'khor gdan la bzhugs/ pad mo rigs kyi dam bskul ba/ 'dir gshegs mchod pa dam pa
bzhes/byang giphyogs na bzhugs pa ni/las kyi rigs (fol. 4b) gyi yum yin tel dpal gyi dam pa dam cig
sgroll mdog Ijang i 'dra ne la 'dra/sna tshogs mdzes pa'i mdangs dang Idan/shin tu gsal ba'i vid bzhin
mdzes/ g.yas gyi phyag na ud dpal bsnams/g.yon gyi phyag na yid bzhin 'dzin/zla ba'i dkyil "khor gdan
la bzhugs
Fol. 5
las kyi rigs gyi dam bskul bal 'dir gshegs mchod dam bzhes/ nang rim lha mo bzhi bzhugs/shar gyi
phyogs na lha mo ni/ rdo rje rigs mchog sgeg mo ste/ rdo rje mdzes can lha mo la/ dkar Irtsa dmar
mdangs dang chas/shel gyi gzi dang mchog 'dram/ zla ba'i dkyil (fol. 5b) 'khor gdan la bzhugs/ rdo
rje'i khu Isur dkar bstan tel'dzum steg tshul gyis thugs dam bskull dir gshegs mchod pa dam pa bzhes/
lho'i phyogs gyi lha mo ni/ rin cen rigs te 'phreng ba ma/ mdog sngo be du rya'i mdog'dram/ rin cen
sprul pa'i spyan dang Idan/ zla ba'i dkyil 'khor gdan
Fol. 6
la bzhugs pa/ rin cen "phreng bas thugs dam bskull 'dir gshegs mchod pa dam pa bzhes/ nub kyi phyogs
kyi lha mo ni pad ma rigs gyi dbyangs mkhan ma/ mdog mdzes pad ma dmar ba'i mdog/yid bzhin rin
cen rgyan du hsnams/ zla ba'i dkyil "khor gdan la bzhugs/ (fol. 6b) sgra dbyangs snyan las thugs dam
bskull 'dir gshegs mchod pa dam pa bzhes/byang giphyogs gyi Iha mo ni/ las gyi rigs gyi gar mkhan
ma/ dkar dmar mdzes pa'i yid 'phrog ma/ zla ba'i dkyil 'khor gdan la bzhugs/brda mchog gar gyis
thugs dam bskul/ 'dir gshegs mchod pa dam pa bzhes...
Fol. 7
skol mdo drug la/ dam isigs/bzlas brjod/bsreg shyang/ Ita ballha bsgom pa smon lam dang drug gol
dam tshig gang zhen/tshul khrims dang sdom ba'i rang bzhin/sku gsung thugs kyi dam tsig gi rtsa ha



P.T. 7A, PT. 108, P.T. 240 and Beijing bsTan 'gyur 3489
gsum dang/ spyod pa'i dam Ishigs las tshogs stel lung bnos nas/ bsrung ba dang spyod pa'ol bsregs
bzlas briod (fol. 7b) pa ni sngags kyi snying po sems la zlos pa dang/ tan tra'i lung rgyud dang/ ngag
gis gsal bar brjod pa'ol bsreg sbyang ni mchod pa'i zhal zas kyi mnams/ sku gsung thugs kvi snying po/
'o ma gis bsreg/ om gis 'ong du bsgyurl hum bdud rtsi zi Ingar bsgyur ba dang/ yang gcig du nal bskul
gsum gis sbyang zhing bag cags bkrus stel mye'i
Fol. 8
bskal pas dngos pa gang yang rung ba bsreg/rlung gi bskal pas bsregs pa'i thal ba thams cad phyar
gyeng/chu ba'i bskal ... (tear in page) cags bkru zhing sbyang ngo/ Ita ba ni shes rab chos tshul stong
... (tear in page) sar chud cing rigs dang/ kun rdzoh bsgyu mar dngos ... (tear in page) mas/ gzugs
brnyan dang brag cha Ita (end of P.T. 240).
Although certain parallels with VAT, SDPS and STTS have been suggested, there is not yet clarification of
the textual origin of these Dunhuang manuscript fragments. It remains to be determined with which tantra
or liturgical cycles these rituals are to be associated, or whether they stem from cycles which are no longer
extant. The Tibetan texts are presented here in full in the hope that other scholars may find data
complementary to their own research.



THE INSCRIPTION(S) AT 'BIS RNAM SNANG (EASTERN TIBET)
Yoshiro Imaeda
(CNRS, Paris)
'Bis (mda / khog) Rnam snang is situated at a distance of about 25 kilometres to the south-west of Jyekundo
(Skye rgu mdo) in Eastern Tibet. There is a well-known temple of which the popular tradition attributes the
construction to the Chinese Princess Wencheng in the first half of the seventh century. On the rock-face
behind the temple, there are inscribed inscriptions in Chinese, Sanskrit and Tibetan. What interests us here
are those in Tibetan.
In recent years, there have been several reports on them: Gnya gang Dkon mchog tshe brtan and Padma
'bum in 1988, Khams stod lo rgyus thor bsdus (stod cha) in 1995, Gdugs dkar Tshe ring in 1996, Samten G.
Karmay and Ba thar Bkra shis chos 'phel, both in 1997. As we are going to see, it is regrettable that none of
them is rigorous enough and complete in description. As a result one is confused even as to such a
fundamental issue of the number of the Tibetan inscriptions. Karmay, who visited the site in 1993, reports
two inscriptions (Karmay, p. 479). The inscription I, in 16 lines, inscribed on a steep and rugged rock-face
about 3 meters high above the ground is almost illegible, and it is partly covered by the wall of the main
temple (photos, p. 485, fig. 1 & 2). Karmay could read only khyi'i lo la, "in the year of dog". The inscription
Il is carved in on a small square stone slab fitted into the front wall of the temple building. The inscription
has 10 lines (photo, p. 486, fig. 3. This inscription has been published without any legend in Qinghai lishi
jiyao, 1987, pl. 10). Karmay states (p. 480): "Inscription II is of genuinely ancient origin and there is no doubt
about its authenticity judging from the style and vocabulary of the language in which it is composed". He
dates this inscription 806 AD. As for the relationship between the two inscriptions, Karmay thinks (p. 479)
that the inscription I contains a version of the inscription II
Gnya' gang Dkon mchog tshe brtan and Padma 'bum, who have seen the inscription II, note that it has
9 lines, but do not specify its location. The inscription is transcribed at p. 66 of their essay, and one notices
that the last and ninth line doubles the length of the other lines. When I told him that the picture of the
inscription reproduced by Karmay shows without any doubt 10 and not 9 lines, Padma 'bum acknowledged
(personal communication) that they probably made a mistake in counting the number of lines. In any way,
the transcription of the inscription which they give is identical to that given by Karmay, except for the fact
that the last and ninth line of the former is split into two in the latter.
Gdugs dkar Tshe ring, who accompanied S. Karmay in 1993 to 'Bis Rnam snang, simply reproduces -
without any information on its location - the inscription in 9 lines (pp. 287-288), as it is copied by Gnya'
gang Dkon mchog tshe brtan and Padma 'bum.
Another author, Ba thar Bkra shis chos 'phel, who also visited 'Bis Rnam snang in 1987, provides a
specific description about the location of the inscription, which he saw and copied. He says (p. 96) that he
took a ladder (them skas) in order to examine it on the rock face behind the temple building (lha khang gi
rgvab kvi brag ngos). Quite regrettably he does not specify either the number of lines or the size of the
inscription. Furthermore, the transcription of the inscription he gives (p. 96) is not complete, but it is in
perfect harmony with the classical orthography, without any of the pre-classical features - like the reversed
vowel sign i and the under-scribed letter ya in myi or myed. Was the original inscription in classical
orthography, or did he carelessly put it in classical orthography? In any way, the text which he provides is
identical, except some omissions and minor variants, with that of the inscription on the stone slab which the
other authors copied.
From what we have seen, it seems that the inscriptions I and II are one and the same. In fact, the only
words which S. Karmay could read in Inscription 1 - khyi'i lo la - are contained at the beginning of
Inscription II. For some reason unknown to us, maybe because the original inscription was damaged or
because it is not easily readable due to its high position (3 meters above the ground), Inscription I must have
been reproduced on a smaller stone slab, what is now Inscription II.



The Inscription(s) at 'Bis Rnam snang (Eastern Tibet)
93
S. Karmay (p. 480) says that Inscription II is "of genuinely ancient origin". However, a closer look at
the text of the inscription shows certain peculiar features which reveal in our opinion that it can not be
genuinely ancient. In fact, its orthographical peculiarity has strangely escaped the attention of Karmay. For
example, in line 10, one reads med and not myed in bla na med pa. The absence of the under-scribed yu (va
btags) is absolutely unusual for an inscription of the beginning of ninth century. Corpus of the Dunhuang
materials of the same period (Y. Imaeda and T. Takeuchi. Choix de documents de Touen-houang, tome III:
Corpus. Paris: Bibliothèque Nationale, 1990) does not show a single case of med against 60 cases of myed.
As a matter of fact, one finds in Corpus two cases of med (PT 1287, 1. 140 and 1. 374) but they are both
errors of transcription. It is rather a natural tendency to remove pre-classical features while transcribing
ancient texts. For example, Ngag dbang don grub, who copied the text of ancient inscriptions for H. E.
Richardson, made the same type of error: mi instead of myi (H. E. Richardson, A Corpus of Early Tibetan
Inscriptions. London: Royal Asiatic Society, 1985, p. 78, "Skar chung Inscription", 1. 33, Original photo,
pl. 10).
Another unusual feature is la sogs pa (1.2). Again Corpus enlists not a single case of this classical
spelling. What one finds in the Dunhuang materials contemporary with our inscription is invariably la stsogs
pa or las stsogs pa.
The underlined double curl opening sign (mgo yig) is also unusual for a text of the ninth century. I have
never come across with this classical sign in the Dunhuang and contemporary materials (cf. C. Scherrer-Schaub.
"Towards a methodology for the study of old Tibetan manuscripts: Dunhuang and Tabo", in E. Steinkellner, ed.,
Tabo Studies II. Roma: ISIAO, Serie Orientale Roma LXXXVII, 1999, pp. 17-18, 25).
These features oblige us to seriously question the antiquity of Inscription II. For the reason explained
above, I think that the text of Inscription II is a faithful transcription in classical orthography of the original
Inscription I, which must have been in pre-classical spelling. There is no reason to question the authenticity
of the text of Inscription II - therefore the argument of S. Karmay based on it - but the inscription itself must
be of a later period.
The guide of 'Bis Rnam snang, composed in 1958 by a monk named Sangs rgyas rgya mtsho (Mdo stod
gnas chen 'bis rnam snang zhes lha gcig rgya bza' long jos brkos pa'i dkar chag don bzhin ston pa'i zhal
lung, reproduced in Khams stod lo rgyus thor bsdus (stod cha], 1995, pp. 50-61), mentions already the
inscription in 10 lines identical with the stone slab photographed by S. Karmay. This seems to indicate that
the stone slab inscription was already made by 1958.
As has been noted, the reports hitherto published are regrettably incomplete and imprecise in many
regards. Therefore, no definite conclusion can be drawn concerning the relationship between the two
inscriptions at 'Bis Rnam snang, Because of their historical importance, it is hoped that a photograph and a
faithful transcription of Inscription I on the rock face will be made accessible for research so that its
authenticity be established beyond any doubt.
Bibliography
Bo thar Bkra shis chos 'phel
"Yul shul khul gyi rgya bza'i lha khang gi brag brkos rten yig la dpyad pa", in Sbrang char, 1997, 3,
pp. 94-98.
Gdugs dkar Tshe ring
"Yul shul 'bis khog rnam snang gtsug lag khang gi bod btsan po'i dus kyi brag brkos lha sku dang yi
ge la yang bskyar dpyad pa", in Zangzu lishi zongiuo yunjiu, 1996, pp. 283-328.
Gnya gong Dkon mchog tshe brtan and Padma 'bum
"Yul shul khul gyi bod btsan po'i skabs kyi rten yig brag brkos ma 'ga'", Krung go'i bod kyi shes rig,
Beijing, 1988, No. 4, pp. 52-75.
Karmay, Samten G.
"Inscription dating from the reign of btsan po Khri Lde-srong btsan", Tibetan Studies, Proceedings of
the 7th Seminar of the International Association for Tibetan Studies, Graz, 1995, pp. 477-486.



PAINTING STYLES IN THE RUBIN COLLECTION:
IDENTIFICATIONS AND CLARIFICATIONS
David Jackson
(Hamburg)
Although the chronology of the founders of the main schools of Tibetan Buddhist painting is now
established beyond dispute and a few examples of most schools can now be identified, the stylistic
classification of actual paintings continues to vex historians of Tibetan art. This conundrum was once worse,
so we can be grateful for whatever progress has been made. Part of the problem may derive from the
oversimplified classification scheme we have inherited from the Tibetan authorities, according to which
there are only three main later schools: 1. sMan-ris, 2. mKhyen-ris, and 3. sGar-bris, the second of which is
rare. Traditional authorities do subdivide the two most important schools, distinguishing an old from new
SMan-ris, treating the New Man-ris of Chos-dbyings-rgya-mtsho almost as a separate school. In the same
way, some differentiated between old and new sGar-bris, the "new" referring to styles Si-tu Pan-chen
patronized in eighteenth-century Khams. Yet even with such additional refinements, one suspects that the
styles were more numerous and their relations more complex.
One of the bravest recent attempts to apply the traditional styles is Rhie and Thurman's catalogue of the
Rubin collection, a book to which I contributed a chapter. Here I would like to try to clarify a few points in
that catalogue, while proposing some further stylistic identifications. I offer these remarks as a recent
footnote to the study of Tibetan painting styles that E. Gene Smith pioneered thirty years ago through his
introduction to Kong-sprul's encyclopedia.
The Main Tibetan Styles
The "Tibetan styles" (bod bris) that took hold after the sMan-thang-pa revolution in the mid-fifteenth
century can be classified:
1. Man-ris
a. Old Man-ris
i. Modern Successors to the Old Man-ris in dBus: The E-bris and "Gelukpa International School"
ii. Successors to the old Man-ris in western g Tsang (Shel-dkar, etc.)
b. New Man-ris
i. New Man-ris of Tashilhunpo, forerunner to the g Tsang-ris
ii. New sMan-ris in eighteenth-or nineteenth-century Khams: A Hybrid SMan-ris / Gar-bris
1. See Jackson 1997.
2. See Jackson 1996.
3. See R. A. Stein 1987, p. 200, who concluded: "D'autres écoles sont encore mentionnées, mais jusqu'ici on n'a guère
trouvé de peintures qu'on pourrait attribuer à telle ou telle d'entre elles." See also J. C. Huntington 1990, p. 229:
"No documentary or other direct evidence illustrates the features that can identify paintings of either the sMan bris
or mKhyen ris schools." See further P. Pal in Singer and Denwood eds. 1997, p. 11: "In the context of Tibetan art,
we can hardly give emphasis to the work of an individual artist, for so much of the art is anonymous... It is difficult
to assemble a corpus that might define an individual artist's style."
4. Rhie and Thurman 1999.
5. I compiled the following notes in fall, 2000, in response to the earlier request of Mr. Don Rubin for a clarification
of the main Tibetan painting styles, especially regarding the Rubin collection. I wrote them while on vacation in
Tunisia, spending many a pristine early North African morning in the hotel restaurant going through the Worlds of
Transformation catalogue with excellent coffee and croissants. I would like to thank Moke Mokotoff for his later
assistance on several points.
6. E. Gene Smith 1970. A revised and corrected version of Smith's introduction has been published in E. Gene Smith
2001. Among Tibetan' Texts, chapter 17.
7. See Jackson 1996, pp. 358 and 361. notes 827 and 828. on the lineage of Wangdrak's father and grandfather



Painting Styles in the Rubin Collection
2. mkhyen-ris
a. Early mkhyen-ris of mKhyen brtse and Disciples
b. The Revival of the mkhyen-ris by the Fifth Dalai Lama
c. A mkhyen-ris Branch Surviving at 'Bri-gung
3. sGar-bris
a. Early sGar-bris
b. Later sGar-bris, Si-tu's Influence
4. Regional Styles
a. dBus-ris (i.e., E-ris, l.a.i. above)
b. gTsang-ris (1.b.i. above)
c. Khams-ris (mainly 3.b. and 1.b.ii above)
d. A-mdo-bris (regional variant of 1.a.i?)
e. Ching Dynasty Court Art (China)
Early Indian-Influenced Styles
These categories leave out the previous, "pre-Tibetan" painting styles, most of which could be classified
under the traditional categories of either "East-[Indian) painting" (shar bris) or "Newar painting" (hal bris).
An example of Tibetan "East-[Indian) painting" would be the early stag-lung bka'-brgyud paintings, such
as catalogue no. 102 (Ru 319). It is wrong (cf. p. 315), to assert that sTag-lung painted lineages usually
include Atiśa, for often they do not (Rhie and Thurman 1996, no. 203, is not typical of the corpus). In
addition, if the main Phyag-chen (Mahāmudrā) lineage is shown - as is usual - there is no need to qualify
the presence of Phag-mo-gru-pa with "perhaps." Phag-mo-gru-pa was sTag-lung-thang-pa's main master
and was crucial to his tradition.
For later Tibetans, "Newar painting" (hal bris) included not only paintings by Newar artists or their
early Tibetan imitators, but also old-fashioned Tibetan styles that resisted the inflow of Chinese art and
aesthetic taste even as late as the sixteenth century. One assumes the portrait of Virupa, no. 83 (Ru 641),
p. 280, is an example of true fourteenth-century Bal-ris, but the identification of the lay master above as
bSod-nams-rtse-mo is doubtful. He is more likely either Sa-skya Pandita's guru rJe-btsun Grags-pa-rgyal-
mtshan or his grandfather, Sa-chen.
Regarding the later period of true Newar-style (Bal-ris) painting, Rhie mentions, p. 55, "Jangpukpa
Kunga Lekpa" (Byang-phug-pa Kun-dga'-legs-pa) as a guru of Tsongkhapa. (His name was omitted from
the index.) In fact, he was a master who flourished in gTsang in the first half of the fifteenth century. The
Bal-ris paintings he commissioned thus could not date to the fourteenth century,
Figure 13. cited by Rhie on p. 54 (from Liu 1-se 1957, fig. 18), is unlikely to have been Sa-skya Pandita.
This iconography with such hand gestures and hand-held objects is not otherwise attested for Sa-pan. One
also wonders whether the attribution (Rhie 1999, p. 55; Liu 1957, figs. 22 and 24) of 'Bri-gung thangkas to
the late fourteenth or early fifteenth century is not too early.
With the portraits "Sakya Lama," no. 86 (= Ngor abbot Sangs-rgyas-seng-ge 1504-1569, 11th abbot),
and "Master Buddhashri," no. 87 (Ru 269), p. 291 f.. we come to later Tibetan continuations of the Bal-ris.
Buddhaśrī is an important Tibetan master who transmitted the Lam 'bras to Ngor-chen Kun-dga'-bzang-po
(1382-1456) in the early fifteenth century. The Lha-mchog-seng-ge of the inscription is the ninth Ngor abbot
Gyal-ba Lha-mchog-seng-ge (1468-1535, abbatial tenure 1516-1534) with this distinctive name who
commissioned the work.
The main figure Buddhasri appears probably in his role as lineage master of the Sa-skya-pa (Ngor-pa)
Lam 'bras instructions. (He is shown wearing special Tibetan monastic garb, so any speculation about his
being an Indian pundit is iconographically impossible). Compare his appearance in the Lam 'bras lineages
8. I refer again to the list of Ngor abbots in Jackson 1993, p. 127. my review of Rhie and Thurman 1991.



96
David Jackson
in no. 189 (Ru 352) p. 468 f. The Indian pandita named Buddhaśrī referred to by Rhie and Thurman (p. 291)
played no known role in any later Tibetan school.
The portrayal of three "Sakya lamas," no. 90 (Ru 63). p. 296, is also stylistic conservative for the
sixteenth century. Here the main figure at top center identified as Se-ston Kun-rig (a lay master) can only be
his ordained disciple Zhang-ston Chos-"bar, who preceded Sa-chen in this Lam 'bras lineage. Strictly
speaking, it is anachronistic to call the first two masters "Sakya" lamas, though their lineages, it is true, were
later mainly transmitted by Sa-chen and his successors.
The portrayal of Great Adept Avadhutipa, no. 44 (Ru 41), p. 219 f., illustrates the penetration of Chinese
styles by the seventeenth or eighteenth century in paintings of the Sa-skya-pa school. Avadhutipa appears
here as a lineage master of the Lam 'bras instructions
"Ganden Renaissance" or "Ming-Court-Inspired Revolution"?
Bob Thurman in his introductory essay (p. 31 ff.) advances the puzzling hypothesis that a "Ganden
Renaissance" took place as a mass movement in Tibetan religious culture from ca. 1400 to the 1640s. His
suggestion is perplexing because, as far as I know, such a "Ganden Renaissance" is nowhere attested in
Tibetan historical writings, old or new. Even if Western historians or Tibetologists might have overlooked
it, could the historically well-informed scholars from Tibet have missed something of such scope and
significance?
Thurman's art historian co-author, M. Rhie, did not adopt the "Ganden renaissance" as a period or
descriptive category in her own essays or descriptions, perhaps because it does not represent a coherent
period or development in art history. The period in question overlaps two major art-historical epochs,
starting (ca. 1400) in the pre-sMan-thang-pa, heavily Indian-influenced, styles (Bal-ris). It includes the
transitional styles of the Gyantse stūpa (1430s-1440s), undergoes the sMan-thang-pa revolution (from the
1450s or 1460s), and ends in a Sinicized style of the later sMan-ris (mid to late seventeenth century).
Thurman's thesis is that Tsongkhapa's visions of Ganden (Tushita) heaven in ca. 1400 triggered a
massive religious and artistic renaissance in Tibet during the two and a half centuries that followed. He
proposes that a "mass movement" took place that also embraced the other main schools of Tibetan
Buddhism, thus denying that he is describing essentially just the Gelukpa school's foundation and its
eventual winning of political supremacy through a military imposition of a theocracy in the 1640s. One
wonders what role the banning of the Gelukpa monks from the Lhasa prayer festival for the first two decades
of the sixteenth century or the driving of the Sera and Drepung monks from their monasteries in 1618 would
have played in this "mass movement," which ended only in the 1640s when the strongest rival schools were
forcibly suppressed through many confiscations and forced conversions of monasteries - and the main
political rivals were eliminated through Mongol-led wars.
Thurman reconstructs in a visionary or intuitive way, without citing historical or art-historical evidence.
His sole Tibetan source is the later detailed hagiography of Tsongkhapa cited as "Gyal-dbang Chos-rje" in the
bibliography. Thurman proposes a visionary mechanism for artistic developments (p. 36): "... their
enlightenments naturally became the basis for a widespread artistic renaissance, as artists of liberated
creativity were moved to articulate their visions to a wider world." This is internally consistent with one of the
key identifying characteristics he ascribes to the art: "presence of visionary clarity."
The renaissance in the West gave rise to neoclassical styles of art and architecture through the
rediscovery of the classical (Greek and Roman) models. For a renaissance analogy to hold in Tibet, one
9. I briefly alluded to this point in Jackson 1993, p. 120.
10. Thurman presented the same thesis in a talk given at the Tibetan studies conference at Bloomington in 1996.
11. Amy Heller 1999, to be sure, called her third chapter The Tibetan Renaissance (1300-1500)," using the term, as
far as I can see, loosely in the sense of time of flourishing arts." and not seriously arguing for the adoption of such
a category. This and her following period, "The Era of the Dalai Lamas (1500-2000)," were nothing more than loose
(and, strictly speaking, historically indefensible) rubrics under which she could include many disparate artistic and
cultural developments.



Painting Styles in the Rubin Collection
97
would, strictly speaking, expect a kind of Indian Buddhist neoclassicism in Tibetan art of the fifteenth
century, Thurman knows this and proposes (p. 36): "In the Tibetan case, the new ideas were the rediscovery
... of the old Indian ideals of Buddhist humanism." But Tibetan aesthetic taste did not experience
neoclassicism. It did just the opposite, veering away from the old Indian decorative elements and adopting
Chinese art for the depiction of everything except the divine figures themselves. This radical change was the
stylistic "revolution" (not revival) led by the Tibetan painters sMan-thang-pa and mKhyen brtse.
The ultimate impulse for Man-thang-pa's stylistic change in ca. 1450 is not to be sought in the insights
or activities of any Tibetan religious master of ca. 1400, but in the generosity and taste of the Ming imperial
court in the next decade. The Ming Yongle emperor (reigned 1403-1424), by commissioning exquisite
Buddhist artworks and offering them to the leading lamas of Tibet (including one of Tsongkhapa top
disciples) whom he invited to his court, sowed the seeds for the coming revolution in Tibetan religious
aesthetic taste. For it was Ming Buddhist masterpiece paintings that sMan-bla-don-grub and mKhyen brtse
took, about four decades later, as their main sources of inspiration
Delayed Penetration of Chinese Styles
The penetration of Chinese landscapes into the backgrounds of paintings that began in the mid-fifteenth
century (under the delayed inspiration of Ming-court Chinese Buddhist art) took a long time to replace the
older styles completely in central Tibet. They were adopted at first through the spread of various more or
less Tibetanized versions of the sMan-ris, and to a lesser degree, through the mKhyen-ris. Then other
Chinese models penetrated via the sGar-bris from the mid-sixteenth century on.
Chinese landscapes were not assimilated everywhere at the same speed. Rhie correctly notes that they
"reached universal acceptance as settings for deities only from the seventeenth century." Even in the
seventeenth century, some connoisseurs such as the Fifth Dalai Lama commissioned "copies" of old art, thus
intentionally producing paintings without such landscapes in the backgrounds.
One interesting phenomenon documented by the Rubin collection is the conservative resistance that
continued well into the sixteenth century, both in Sa-skya-pa art (where one would have expected it, for
example at Ngor) and in paintings of the Karma Ka'-brgyud-pa. I refer to six such paintings:
No. 85 (Ru 457), first half of the sixteenth century
No. 86 (Ru 493), mid-sixteenth century
No. 89 (Ru 162), ca. 1500
Nos. 103-105 (Ru 562, 561 and 536), mid-sixteenth century
Concerning painting no. 103 (Ru 562), p. 317 f., the gSang-'dus Rim-Inga lineage is not the lineage of the
whole set, which portrays as main figures of each thangka two lineage lamas of the Phyag-chen (Zung 'jug).
The gSang-'dus Rim-Inga is the minor lineage portrayed in only one thangka (Ru 560).
When assessing the penetration of Chinese styles (Rhie 1999, p. 56 ff.), the Sixteen Arhats (or Sixteen
Elders, gnas brtan bcu drug) should be treated as a special subject. Since this cycle originated from China,
by definition it entailed more Chinese influence. One can get a more accurate idea of the extent to which
12. The concept of renaissance in the sense of "enthusiastic cultural renewal and revival of wider learning and interest
in the past" has some parallels in Tibetan history, though literary Tibetan does not usually use the literal expressions
for "rebirth" (bskyar skye or slar skye). The closest concept in Tibetan might be "subsequent flourishing" (phyi dar).
a well-known word in Tibetan Buddhist history originally referring to the reestablishment of Buddhism (bstan pa
phyi dar) in ca. 1000 after the interruption that ended the period of "early flourishing" (snga dar) in the 840s. It is
interesting to note that T. G. Dhongthog in his The New Light English Tibetan Dictionary (Dharamsala, 1973) uses
phyi dar when defining renaissance: sgyu itsal dang vi ge'i phyi dar ("later flourishing of art and letters").
13. See, for instance, Amy Heller 1999, pp. 142-144, and Robert E. Fisher 1997, pp. 183-188.
14. On the importance of the Yongle emperor for the patronage of Buddhist art, see Marsha Weidner ed. (1994), Latter
Days of the Law: Images of Chinese Buddhism 850-1850, p. 52 ff. and 107 f. On the invitation of Tsongkhapa to
the imperial court (who declined to come), see E. Sperling (1982). "The 1413 Embassy to Tsong-kha-pa and the
Arrival of Byams-chen Chos-rje Säkya ye-shes as the Ming Court," Journal of the Tibet Society, vol. 2,
pp. 105-107



98
David Jackson
Chinese styles have penetrated a given Tibetan school by looking at the backgrounds of more purely Indic
iconographic subjects that had no special link with China.
"Shakyamuni Buddha with Life-scenes" (catalogue no. 13, Ru 264, p. 159 f.), is another such
iconographic subject that originated from China: a depiction of a Chinese "Hundred Deeds of the Buddha"
(rgya mdzad). This iconographic cycle, too, should eventually be gathered and investigated as a group.
Rhie's description of no. 13 mentions virtually all styles, even the Tenth Karma-pa; however, the painting
seems to be by a sMan-ris artist.
1.a.i. MODERN SUCCESSORS TO THE OLD SMAN-RIS IN DBUS PROVINCE
THE SO-CALLED "GELUKPA INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL" AND THE E-RIS
In the thangka of "Guru Drakpochey and the Between-State Deities," no. 179 (557), p. 445 f., the clouds are
exactly those of a typical sMan-ris of dBus province, central Tibet, of the late nineteenth or early twentieth
century. Note the repeated shape of the clouds and their unshaded outer edges. There is no reason to attribute
this painting to Eastern Tibet.
By contrast, "Vaishravana and the Eight Troll Generals," no. 58 (Ru 123), p. 238 f., is by no means a
typical Lhasa sMan-ris of ca. 1900, which abhorred solid dark-blue skies and would never outline clouds
with indigo. I see nothing to support the hypothesis (p. 238) that it was possibly by an artist working in
Lhasa who combined elements of the traditional New Menri and Karma Gardri styles."
The sMan-ris commonly practiced by artists of dBus province was not necessarily the high art of the
Dalai Lama's court artists, though the traditions may have overlapped at times. The painting of Sākyamuni
with Avadāna legends, no. 14 (Ru 494), p. 159 ff., is attributed to the refined New Man-ris style of the Lhasa
workshops ca. 1900. This depiction of certain episodes from KȘemendra's work is based on sNar-thang
blocks, and at first glance it would seem to be a fine g Tsang-bris - note the very dark sky above and the
shading of clouds. It may be possible in due course to differentiate this possibly "Tashilhunpo court art, ca,
1900 [?]" from "Lhasa court art, ca. 1900," or to verify Rhie's Lhasa supposition. I admit that the style
of no. 14 is similar to Jackson 1996, pl. 67, identified by me as in a high court style of nineteenth-
century Lhasa.16
In "the Fourth Dalai Lama and some previous incarnations," no. 128 (Ru 380), p. 357 f., the main figure
is one of the Dalai Lamas, whose glorious spiritual pedigree the thangka portrays. The painting itself
probably dates to the mid- or late-seventeenth century and not the eighteenth or nineteenth century. This
treatment of clouds as dominating landscape elements is unusual but not impossible for the late seventeenth
century. Such a trulku-lineage portrait can hardly be much later than the last historical figure portrayed.
Could the vase in the central figure's left hand symbolize a prayer for his long life, as it so clearly does for
the facing portrait of the Fifth Dalai Lama (cat. no. 129, Ru 506)? It is understandable that Rhie and
Thurman had trouble identifying the main figure. From an iconographical and structural standpoint, one
would expect the first four Dalai Lamas below, but instead one finds:
22? Central Figure
21?
18 19
20
Inscriptions:
18. Chos rgyal 'phags pa
19. de 'dun grub pa [the First Dalai Lama)
20. bSod nams rgya (mtsho] (the Third Dalai Lama)
21? Ngag dbang blo ...? rgya mtsho
22? Main figure [no inscription]
15. On the Chinese "Hundred Deeds." see Jackson 1996, p. 133, n. 249.
16. Compare Jackson 1996. pl. 67, with Essen and Thingo 1989. 1-12, which also has a fairly light horizon in
the landscape.



Painting Styles in the Rubin Collection
99
The inscription beneath figure no. 21 is the Fifth Dalai Lama's name. Note his typical portrait with small
mustache (cf. cat. no. 129). So who could the main figure be? The Second, Fourth, or even Sixth Dalai
Lama? Comparison with other portraits might help solve this puzzle."
The E-ris as an important Old Sman-ris successor in dBus
E. Gene Smith 1970, p. 46, asserted that the New Man-ris of Chos-dbyings-rgya-mtsho was the main origin
of the later twentieth-century Lhasa or central-Tibetan mode (after blending with "Khyenri, Gadri and later
Indian influences"). A similar opinion repeated several times by Rhie is that Chos-dbyings-rgya-mtsho's
New sMan-ris later developed into the (Central-Tibetan) Man-ris "international style." I have found no
written source or other authority for either assertion. M. Rhie (1999, p. 68) suggests in the same vein that
the New sMan-ris of the Potala murals became a national style for Gelukpa monasteries throughout Tibet,
and an international style, spreading also to Gelukpa establishments of Mongolia and China. She describes
this as "a handsome and complex style, which can overpower the viewer with its mass of detail."18
Against this, I have proposed that the continuation of the New sMan-ris (sMan-gsar) of Chos-dbyings-
rgya-mtsho was the gTsang-ris, especially at Tashilhunpo, and not the dBus-ris. The typical dBus-ris of the
nineteenth and early twentieth century was a continuation of the old sMan-ris (sMan-rnying), for which I
presented some evidence in a previous study.20
One further term sometimes associated with the later (Old) Man-ris typical of dBus province is E-ris.
There was a special connection between the nineteenth-century dBus-ris painters and the district E in
southern Bus, for many influential painters and sculptors came from there.21 The well-known modern artist
and authority bsTan-pa-rab-brtan ("Temba Rabden") informed me that his family, the Kha-dog Lho-ma,
came from Kong-po-smad village in E.22 bs Tan-pa-rab-brtan's father was bsKal-bzang-nor-bu, son of Tshe-
ring-rgya-bo, an important painter patronized by the Thirteenth Dalai Lama. Tshe-ring-rgya-bo's father was
the painter Padma. bs Tan-pa-rab-brtan's paternal (great) uncle was Las-tshan Tshe-ring-don-grub, a senior
thangka painter of the Thirteenth Dalai Lama with an official rank, whose photograph in 1937 by C. Suydam
Cutting has been reproduced numerous times, most recently by C. Harris 1999.21 Thus these painters came
from E and embodied an E-bris hereditary lineage that has continued down to bs Tan-pa-rab-brtan himself
1.b.. NEW SMAN-RIS OF TASHILHUNPO, FORERUNNER TO THE GTSANG-RIS
Rhie. p. 67, states that the founder of the g Tsang New Man-ri. Chos-dbyings-rgya-mtsho, was "primarily
used for the wall paintings and various paintings and thangkas sponsored by the Fifth Dalai Lama and his
teacher the Pan-chen Lama..." This is slightly misleading, since Chos-dbyings-rgya-mtsho was only known
to have painted once in Lhasa or dBus province (working on the Potala murals in 1648), but otherwise was
exclusively active in his native province, g Tsang, mostly at Tashilhunpo.
Similarly, sMan-thang-pa Man-bla-don-grub is not recorded to have painted for the First Dalai Lama
in Lhasa or elsewhere in dBus (Central Tibet). His only recorded murals (and writings) were executed
in g Tsang
17. Cf. the thangka in K. Tanaka (1999), p. 127, no. 54, with bSod-nams-rgya-mtsho as the main figure. Cf. also the
block-prints in Doboom Tulku and Glenn H. Mullin (1995), pp. 69-77.
18. Cf. Rhie 1991, p. 62.
19. See Jackson 1993, p. 116.
20. Jackson 1996, p. 345 and n. 779. My assertion seems to have found acceptance by C. Harris (1999), p. 65. Harris's
uncertainty (ibid..) about the founder of the New Man-ris (sman ris gsar ma) is simply a confusion of two similar
names, [gTsang-pa) Chos-dbyings-rgya-mtsho and [Karma-pa) Chos-dbyings-rdo-rje. The identities of these
contemporary painters are now well established (see Jackson 1996, part II, chapters 8 and 9).
21. See Jackson 1996. p. 345.
22. bs Tan-pa-rab-brtan, interview, Leiden, 2000. Tiny reproductions of two thangkas by bs Tan-pa-rab-brtan ("Temba
Rabden") appear in C. Harris 1999. p. 39.
23.C. Harris 1999, p. 89, fig. 38.



100
David Jackson
The extraordinary sākyamuni, no. 183 (Ru 75), p. 454 f., is the best example of Chos-dbyings-rgya-
mtsho's New sMan-ris style in this collection. I would place it in g Tsang (probably Tashilhunpo) of the
second half of the seventeenth century or early eighteenth century. There is no need to add or Eastern Tibet"
to the description
The portrait of a Nyingma Lama, no. 68 (Ru 307), p. 258 f., is indeed an example of the gTsang-ris, i.e.
a later (eighteenth- or nineteenth-century) successor to Chos-dbyings-rgya-mtsho's "New Man-ris." I
cannot detect any elements of the Karma sGar-bris modifying it.
I also agree that the portrayal of Tsongkhapa at the center of a Gelukpa refuge tree, no. 191 (Ru 571),
p.473, is probably Tashilhunpo art by a follower of Chos-dbyings-rdo-rje's tradition, just as attributed. Note
again the strong preference for faces in partial relief. A careful working out of the lineage lamas above
should yield a more accurate dating.
Lb.ii. New SMAN-RIS IN THE EIGHTEENTH- OR NINETEENTH-CENTURY KHAMS:
A HYBRID SMAN-RIS / SGAR-BRISHYU
"Green Tara saving from the eight perils," no. 38 (Ru 237), p. 207, is clearly Khams art of ca. the nineteenth
century. My hypothesis is that it represents the school of Chab-mdo Phur-bu-tshe-ring that was later
called the Khams-bris or New sMan-ris of Khams. Its connection with the New sMan-ris of g Tsang
remains unknown.
The composition of no. 38 seems to derive from an original commissioned or planned by Si-tu Pan-
chen: Note the architectural details. But its use of deep blues and greens in the landscape is not typical of
Si-tu's own commissions. Some elements such as the crags to the main figure's right and the flowers and
leaves beneath her lotus seat hint at a nineteenth-century hybrid Man-ris / Gar-bris style.
Virupa and the Path and Fruition Refuge Tree, no. 189 (Ru 352), p. 468 f., portrays two different lineages
of the Lam 'bras: The Slob bshad (to the viewer's left) and the Tshogs bshad (to the right), that come together
in the main lama below (no. 44). Something has gone wrong with the numbering of the later figures in the
description (p. 469). Such a dark blue sky was, to my knowledge, rarely used in the best-known Khams styles.
(Cf. the dark sky of the thangka of the Eight-Four Adepts (grub chen), showing Blo-gter-dbang-po below as
guru, in the first Hahn collection catalogue. K. Tanaka 1997, pl. 51.)
2. MKHYEN-RIS
2.a. EARLY MKHYEN-RIS OF MKHYEN-BRTSE AND DISCIPLES
The mKhyen-ris is a rare style. Regarding its founder, mKhyen brtse of Gong-dkar, Rhie and Thurman
(1999, pp. 31; 74, n. 52; 497; etc.) continue to use the mistaken name "Khyentse Wangchuk." The school's
founder was actually called mKhyen brtse Chen-mo ("Chen-mo" was his title as master artist and overseer
of large projects). No Tibetan source calls him mKhyen brtse-dbang-phyug, and I have tried to clarify the
confusion of mkhyen brtse-chen-mo with Tshar-chen's great disciple mkhyen brtse-dbang-phyug, to
correct the erroneous suggestion of E. G Smith 1970.24 No written source links mkhyen-brtse explicitly to
either Gyantse or Lhasa monastic universities, though if he was a co-student of Man-thang-pa (as tradition
maintains), he may have studied under gNas-rying artists and painted at Gyantse alongside Man-thang-pa.
2.b. THE REVIVAL OF THE MKHYEN-RIS BY THE FIFTH DALAI LAMA AND OTHERS IN SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY
CENTRAL TIBET
"Guru Rinpoche as Suryaprabha," no. 61 (Ru 675), p. 246 f., is, I agree, an example of the mKhyen-ris. It
is probably also seventeenth century, but not from eastern Tibet. In uncertain cases, it would be better to list
neither provenance rather than both.
"Shakyamuni," no. 2 (Ru 39), p. 138, is said to be mkhyen-ris from eastern Tibet, but this is unlikely.
No lineage of mKhyen-ris is recorded to have reached Khams or A-mdo. (Could this painting be from A-
mdo?) A mkhyen-ris attribution for the Arhat set, nos. 24-27. seems to me to be even less certain
24. See Jackson 1996. p. 139 ff, and Jackson 1997, Singer and Denwood eds., p. 257 6.



Painting Styles in the Rubin Collection
101
2.c. A MKHYEN-RIS BRANCH SURVIVING AT FROM THE LATE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY
The 'Bri-gung abbatial history by bs Tan-'dzin-padma'i-rgyal-mtshan (1770-1826), a painter and authority
on religious art, records that a branch of the mKhyen-ris survived at 'Bri-gung from the late seventeenth
century onward. "Padmasambhava Refuge Host Field Tree," no. 193 (Ru 413), p. 476 f., seems to be a later
painting from this 'Bri-gung tradition and does not need to be classified as "Eastern Tibetan."25 Though not
in a typical Man-ris style of dBus, the painting comes from central Tibet and has a 'Bri-gung subject matter.
The attribution (p. 477) "non-sectarian" is problematic; is it not a refuge tree for a Nying-ma tradition
practiced among the 'Bri-gung-pa? The inscriptions identify masters of the 'Bri-gung tradition.
Incidentally, no. 113 (Ru 362), called "A Drigung Kagyu Lama," portrays a 'Brug-pa bka-brgyud lama
with his lineage, though I have yet to work out the exact tradition.
3.a. EARLY SGAR-BRIS
The authors assert (p. 497) in connection with the "Karma Gardri" that most artists painting in the Karma
sGar-bris style were followers of the Karma bka'-brgyud in Khams and A-mdo. But Karma sGar-bris
painters (like Karma Ka'-brgyud monasteries) were unknown in A-mdo 26
The main figure in "A Lama," no. 132 (Ru 418), p. 363 ff., is not a lama of the Gelukpa tradition. He
is the twelfth-century Dwags-po bka'-brgyud master sGom-chung Shes-rab-byang-chub, nephew of sGam-
po-pa (1079-1153) and younger brother of som-pa Tshul-khrims-snying-po (1116-1169).27 This painting is
from a series of bka'-brgyud-pa masters and may date to the late sixteenth or first half of the seventeenth
century. The identification of the main figure is only possible from the inscriptions:
23
4 5
6 7 8
Inscriptions:
1. sgom chung shes rab byang chub
2. slob dpon thog med
3. rje na ro pa
4. gcung grags mdzes
5. sgom zhi mdzes
sGom-chung Shes-rab-byang-chub is a minor and little-known figure in most contexts, but he did appear as
a main figure in a still unpublished thangka series depicting the successive rebirths of the dPal-spungs Si-tu
sprul-sku. Could this painting be from an older such trulku-lineage set?
Similar series of portraits with main figures set in elegant (Ming) Chinese landscapes were painted in
central Tibet by the early seventeenth century. I have seen photographs of an almost complete set from that
period depicting the series of the successive rebirths of the Jo-nang-pa lama Kun-dga'-grol-mchog or
Tăranātha.28 An undated series of 'Bri-gung masters preserved in Limi in the northwestern borderlands of
Nepal may also be this old. 29
25. On the 'Bri-gung painting traditions, see also Jackson 1996, pp. 338-343.
26. Jackson 1996, p. 42, n. 50.
27. A brief biographical mention of sGom-chung Shes-rab-byang-chub is found in rTa-tshag Tshe-dbang-rgyal, Lho
trong chos 'byung, Gangs can rig mdzod, vol. 26 (Bod-ljongs bod-yig pe-rnying ope-skrun-khang, 1994),
p. 180.
28. Two thangkas, apparently from this set, were offered at Christies "to benefit a Tibetan monastery in a Himalayan
Kingdom." See sale no. 9608 (March 21, 2001) lot no. 161 and 162. One pictured Chos-kyi-nyin-byed (68 x 49.5
cm.) and the other, Dharma-dbang-phyug (67.5 x 49). Though dated "ca. 1800" for the auction, the set appears to
be not from the Go-log (Golok) region but from early-seventeenth-century gTsang, i.e. from Jo-nang itself. The size
is close to that of certain other Jo-nang-pa thangkas of the period. A larger portrait of Chos-kyi-nyin-byed (80 x 54 cm.)



102
David Jackson
A major difference between this painting (no. 132) and the portraits of Pan-chen Lama successive
rebirths attributed by me to Chos-dbyings-rgya-mtsho is the positioning of the main figure here on the
central axis. The composition in no. 132 is balanced and its central figure, relatively small.
The portrait of the Ninth Karma-pa dBang-phyug-rdo-rje (no. 106, Ru 1630, p. 321 f.) should be
considered as probably early Karma sGar-bris, but it should not be automatically attributed to Khams. It
could also have come from central Tibet. Nam-mkha'-bkra-shis, the official founder of the sGar-bris, did not
paint in Khams, but only in dBus, as far as we know.
3.b. LATER SGAR-BRIS, SI-TU'S INFLUENCE
The later Karma sGar-bris style that, from the 1730s onward, flourished again mainly in Khams under the
influence and patronage of Si-tu Pan-chen was the main subject of my chapter in the Worlds of
Transformation catalogue (pp. 89-125). Quite a few sets commissioned by Si-tu Pan-chen in this style are
known, and more continue to appear.
A noteworthy example of the style is the portrait of a then still unidentified "Shamar Lama," p. 87,
pl. 4. The mid- or late-eighteenth-century dating I proposed for this thangka agrees with the identity of the
main figure I have since been able to establish. His facial features and hand gestures identify him as the
Tenth Zhwa-dmar, Mi-pham Chos-grub-rgya-mtsho (1742-1792).
By contrast, the dPal-ldan-Iha-mo of the Gelukpa tradition, no. 146 (Ru 179), p. 386 f., is not done in
a Si-tu style. There is very little that identifies this as from Eastern Tibet.
A small school of painting established in Manali in the Indian Himalayas by Glang-thang-pa Ngag-
dbang-rdo-rje (Ngawang Dorje) of 'Phan-po and his pupils seems to follow, primarily, the Karma Gar-bris,
which he evidently learned from a sGar-bris (Khams-pa?) painter before leaving 'Phan-po and 'dBus as a
young man. It has been misleadingly called the "Spiti School" by the Himachal Pradesh
Tourist Board.2
4. REGIONAL STYLES
Tibetan painters commonly distinguished recent styles according to geographical origin, using such
terms as:
a. dBus-bris (recent successor to the Old Man-ris) (1.a.i. above)
b. gTsang-bris (successor to the New Man-ris of Tashilhunpo) (1.b.i. above)
c. Khams-bris
d. A-mdo-bris (regional variant of 1.a.i?)
(To this one might add styles from outside Tibet proper, such as: e. Ching Dynasty Court art in China and
from Mongolian Buddhist painting.)
With few exceptions, these do not replace the above classification according to school, but rather
identify where the school had many followers later. Strictly speaking, the regional styles require further sub-
classifications, since dBus, gTsang and Khams provinces were all home to more than one school. Still,
Tibetans commonly did speak of a style of a given province, referring to its most widespread style.
Ye-shes-jam-dbyangs (1932-), an old painting master of the 'Bri-gung tradition who originally came
from Nyurla (sNur-la) in Ladakh, repeated a traditional list of six regional or local styles:
survives in a private collection, Cologne, which is stylistically similar to some of the eighteenth-century dPal-
spungs sets.
29. Jackson 1996. p. 341. The Drikung painter Yeshe Jamyang said they might date to the time of the 'Bri-gung abbol
Chos-kyi-rgyal-po (1335-1407), though he never saw them except in photographs.
30. See Jackson 1996, p. 234 ff.
31. It was not the typical dBus-bris style of 'Phan-po, on which see Jackson 1996, p. 368, n. 831
32. C. Harris 1997, p. 266 f., and 1999, pp. 11 and 68.
33. Yeshe Jamyang, interviewed on September 9. 1995, at Leh, Ladakh, by Nyurla Ngawang Tsering. Clare Harris
1999, p. 68, has presented this listing in translation or paraphrase, without the original Tibetan wording.



Painting Styles in the Rubin Collection
103
[1] Gyari (rgya ris), the painting school of China
[2] Khamri (khams ris), the painting school of Khams
[3] Driri ('bri ris), the painting school of Drigung ['Bri-gung in northern dBus province]
[4] Tsuri (mtshur ris), the painting school of Tsurpu [m Tshur-phu monastery in northeast dBus]
(5) Eri (e ris), the painting school of E district [in southeast dBus province]
[6] Tsangri (gtsang ris), the painting school of Tsang province (particularly at Tashilhunpo)
Often painters differentiated regional styles on the basis of the relative lightness or darkness of their
overall color schemes. Ye-shes-jam-dbyangs, for instance, repeated four traditional descriptions of
painting schools:
[1] "Chinese style was like a rainbow in the sky" (rgya bris nam mkha'i 'ja' ishon 'dra)
[2] "The painting school from Khams was like the dusk of evening" (khams ris mun pa rub pa
'dra)
(3) "The style of E district is like the dawn" (e bris nam mkha' langs pa 'dra)
[4] "The painting school from Drigung is like after sunrise" ('bri bris nyi ma shar ba 'dra)
Thus, the colors of one non-dBus school, that of Khams, were comparatively dark and muted (like those of
the gТsang style), as after dusk has fallen. The styles of two dBus-district traditions were lighter. That of E
(the g Ye-ris or E-bris of dBus) was, however relatively faint, like the colors at dawn, while those of the 'Bri-
gung (the 'Bri-bris) were lighter and "paler" (skya ba), like after sunrise.
In the above list, Khams style" does not refer to the Karma sGar-bris, which was listed above
separately as the Tsuri (mTshur-bris) and possessed a light palette. Instead, it refers to a darker sMan-ris /
sGar-bris synthesis the predominated in many parts of Khams by the early twentieth century (presumably
the style of such nineteenth-century painters as Chab-mdo Phur-bu-tsher-ring and his followers). This darker
Khams style may be represented by catalogue nos. 38 (Ru 237), 67 (Ru 678), 116 (Ru 276), and 187
(Ru 367).
Wangchuk (dBang-phyug) of Ladakh similarly contrasted the main (Old Man-ris) painting tradition
typical of the whole of dBus province in central Tibet with his own g Tsang (New sMan-ris) style:37
The colors of dBus are like dawn.
The colors of g Tsang are like dusk.
In actual practice, the relatively lighter or darker colors can be detected most easily in the skies. Such
nutshell characterizations are useful for differentiating the central-Tibetan Man-ris traditions, but they
should not be used without other stylistic criteria.
The late painter Wandrak (dBang-grags, 1925-1988) from Shel-dkar in western g Tsang similarly stated
that the early-twentieth-century Lhasa style (here referring primarily to an Old sMan-ris, the E-ris) was
overall much lighter than the g Tsang style of Tashilhunpo (the New Man-ris). For the coloration of clouds,
its artists used only blue and green, whereas red- and orange-tinged clouds were also possibilities for
Tashilhunpo artists. Lhasa artists preferred perfectly balanced compositions, while Tashilhunpo artists often
sketched compositions that were not symmetrical. He added that Lhasa artists typically used to space very
evenly the five skulls or the five golden rigs-Inga ornaments on the heads of deities. Some Tashilhunpo
34. Yeshe Jamyang, interviewed on September 9, 1995, at Leh, Ladakh, by Nyurla Ngawang Tsering. Cf. Clare Harris
1997. p. 268.
35. Yeshe Jamyang explained that the style of E district was the painting tradition of the Lhasa government (Iha sali
gzhung gi rimo). Cf. C. Harris 1999. p. 69. who seems to have not understood "e ris." but only its gloss, "dbus ris."
36. Another example is K. Tanaka (2001), p. 94 f. pl. 39.
37. Wangchuk (dBang-phyug) of Ladakh (interview Leh, 31 July 1977): dbus gi tshon ni skya mda 'dra/ gtsang gi
Ishon ni sa rub 'dra/). Wangchuk had studied (in ca, the late 1960s or early 1970s) under Dawa Pasang (Zla-ba-pa-
sangs), an old master of the Tashilhunpo tradition



104
David Jackson
artists would, by contrast, place the three central ones closely together, while leaving a wider gap between
them and the two outside ones.
4.a. DBUS-BRIS
The predominant regional style of dBus has been briefly touched on above in section 1.a.i. as later
successors to the Old Man-ris in dBus province. Some typical examples have been published. It is
essential not to confound this recent Central-Tibetan continuation of Old Man-ris with the different
traditions known as "New Man-ris," as some have done.40 It might lessen the confusion to call it the E-bris,
after its origin in E district in southern dBus.
4.b. GTSANG-BRIS
One of the recent styles that should not be too difficult to document is that of g Tsang, successors to the New
sMan-ris of Chos-dbyings-rgya-mtsho especially at Tashilhunpo. Two great painters of this school have
published painting manuals that feature color illustrations." Some typical earlier examples have also been
published from Ladakhi collections.42 (Most dGe-lugs-pa monks from Ladakh who received a higher
scholastic training did so at Tashilhunpo, their mother monastery or gdan sa, and this gave rise to other
cultural links.)
The painter Phuntsok Sangpo (Phun-tshogs-bzang-po), one of the outstanding g Tsang-bris proponents
of the last generation, enumerated in his recent manual three styles - dBus-bris, gTsang-bris and Khams-bris
- stressing the need for each style to retain its distinct identity." His manual makes clear the richness and
complexity of the g Tsang-bris tradition, within which three distinct traditions could be discerned:
1. The tradition of Bro-khyung.** This tradition possessed slightly more rocky crags and streams, but
relatively fewer clouds and flowers.
2. The tradition of Rigs-bzang-lags, the master painter of sKyid-bde-shar. This was basically a g Tsang-
style, to which certain excellent elements from Chinese painting (rgya bris) had been added.
3. The tradition of Phuntsok Sangpo's teacher, Sod-nams-stobs-rgyas, in which crags, streams, clouds
and flowers were widely depicted. The colors were applied intensely, and the bodily proportions
were authentic.45
Phuntsok Sangpo studied thirteen years under bSod-nams-stobs-rgyas, youngest son of the famous g Tsang-
bris painting master dBu-chen 'Jigs-med-lags. 'Jigs-med-lags also had two older sons (Phun-tshogs-dbang-
rgyal and sPen-pa-rgyal-po), and he participated in the painting of murals during the renovation of the Jo-
khang in Lhasa in the time of the Thirteenth Dalai Lama. 'Jigs-med-lags's teacher was the renowned painter
Blo-bzang-dpal-'byor, a monk painter of Tashilhunpo who was the disciple of dBu-chen Grags-pa-chos-
38. Wangdrak, interview Rajpur, 1982. Presented in Jackson 1996, p. 358 and n. 821.
39. For thangkas of yi-dam deities, see for instance Essen and Thingo 1989, vol. 2, nos. II-305, 306 and 315.
40.C. Harris 1999, p. 68 f., was understandably confused by informants who indiscriminately used "New Menri" for
all recent (hence "new") continuations of the sMan-ris. This leads her to consider (p. 68) the New Menri to be a
misnomer and to state (p. 69) that the dBus-ris is a Mew Menri style. It would be better to classify the twentieth-
century dBus-ris (E-ris) as an "Old Menri School of Central Tibet" (as she quotes on p. 65 Rigzin Paljor's book as
doing). Cf. also G. Beguin 1995, chart p. 72 f., which shows all recent sMan-ris as "sMan-ris gsar-ma," evidently
following S. and J. Huntiongton 1990, p. 614 f.
41. Phuntsok Sangpo 1996 and Blo-bzang-phun-tshogs, Ka'-chen 1993.
42. Acarya Ngawang Samten 1986, nos. 3-8 and 13-19. The first group is wrongly identified as "Sgar-bris style," and
the second group, depicting the famous Pan-chen Rinpoche set (thangka 13 is the same composition as cat. 131, Ru
477), is just called "Sman-bris."
43. Phuntsok Sangpo 1996, p. 19. His painting of a Nyingma assembly field, executed in 1971, was published in C.
Trungpa 1975, no. 23. R73.
44. The name Bro-khyung is unknown to me. 'Brong-rtse and Nor-bu-khung-rtse are places in the Myang-chu valley
southeast of Tashilhunpo.
45. Phuntsok Sangpo 1996. p. 18.



Painting Styles in the Rubin Collection
105
'phel. Grags-pa-chos-'phel, in turn, painted thangkas for a previous incarnation of the Pan-chen Rinpoche
(in the mid to late nineteenth century ca.).46
Phuntsok Sangpo participated in 1945 in the renovation of the Sa-skya Lha-khang-chen-mo, for which
about eighty painters were summoned from other parts of g Tsang, including sTod (Shel-dkar, etc., in western
gTsang), Lha-rtse, "7 Bo-dong and rTse-gdong, rTse-gdong Lha-bris dBu-chen dBang-'dud-lags, the chief
overseer of painting in the project, remarked at the time on the purity and authenticity of Phuntsok Sangpo's
gTsang-bris style.49
gTsang-bris painters had a fondness for asymmetrical compositions. Their landscapes commonly
included snow-capped peaks on one side (which were rarely painting in the dBus-bris), and they had a
special way of shading clouds in the sky and clinging to the tops of hillsides (cat. nos. 14 and 131). Note
also the use of pink clouds in both.50
A group of g Tsang-bris painters was summoned on at least one occasion in the 1930s to work at Lhasa
in dBus, at which time they picked up some traditional pigment usage from the painters of dBus province.si
At least one prominent Man-ris painter from Khams claimed to follow the New Man-ris of Chos-dbyings-
rgya-mtsho.2
4.c. KHAMS-BRIS
In recent centuries no single style enjoyed a monopoly over the whole of Khams. Instead, several styles
coexisted, of which two were more typically Khams-pa or "eastern": 1., the sGar-bris (3.b, above) and 2., the
Khams-bris, a sMan / Gar hybrid (1.b.ii, above). In both of these, a stronger Chinese influence via the sGar-
bris is obvious in comparison with the central-Tibetan Man-ris styles, old or new. In addition, some painters
in Khams worked in varieties of a third tradition: 3. sMan-ris styles that remained closer to those of dBus
province. And some outstanding Khams-pa painters may even have followed the New Man-ris of g Tsang, 53
Sometimes the three main styles coexisted not only in the same Khams district but even in the same
painter. The painter Blo-bzang-'jam-dbyangs (b. 1929) from Re-sgang village of Cha-phreng district in
southeast Khams, for example, stated that in his homeland three painting styles were followed:54
1. sMan-ris (close to that of dBus in Central Tibet)
2. Khams-bris (the hybrid Khams style)
3. Karma Gar-bris
He claimed he could paint in all three. Cha-phreng artists commonly were called to both Li-thang and Gyal-
thang to paint.
46. Phuntsok Sangpo 1996, p. 17. The Pan-chen Rinpoche in question might have been the fifth, Blo-bzang-bstan-pali-
dbang-phyug (1855-1882). For an eighteenth-century g Tsang-bris painting of the Pan-chen Lama series of rebirths,
see Erberto Lo Bue 1998, p. 38 f., pl. 13.
47. Lha-rtse rdzong in western g Tsang was in the mid-twentieth century home to about fifteen or sixteen painters who
followed a more conservative and provincial gTsang-bris tradition. See Jackson 1996, p. 367, n. 826. Lha-rtse was
already a home for painters by the 1430s, the time of the painting of the dPal-'khor stupa in Gyantse.
48. On painters from Tse-gdong in recent generations, see Jackson 1996, p. 357, and p. 367, n. 816.
49. Phuntsok Sangpo 1996, p. 18. Tse-gdong Lha-bris dBu-chen dBang-dud-lags was assisted at Sa-skya by the dBu-
chung Zla-ba-don-grub and 'Jam-dbyangs. He is mentioned in Jackson 1996, p. 357, as "Jo-lags dBang-dus-lags
of bDe-skyid-gling village in rTse-gdong."
50. Jackson 1996, p. 246, n. 545.
51. Jackson 1996, pp. 358 and 367, n. 824.
52.C. Harris 1999, p. 65, quotes the Dharamsala monk painter Sangs-rgyas-ye-shes (b. 1929) as stating he was a
follower of the New Man-ris of Chos-dbyings-(rgya-mtsho). Indeed, the thangka attributed to a pupil of "Sangay
Yeshi" published in Harris 1999, p. 63, possesses some of the hallmarks of the g Tsang-ris, such as asymmetrical
landscape composition and presence of a snow mountain on the horizon. Sangs-rgyas-ye-shes in a 1992 interview
claimed to have begun learning painting with the best painter in Khams." What a pity this important painter's
name, residence and origin were not recorded!
53. C. Harris 1999, p. 65. See the previous note.
54. Blo-bzang-jam-dbyangs of Cha-phreng, interview Dharamsala, 1996,



106
David Jackson
Similarly, Namgyal G. Ronge in his article on art and style in Tibet published in 1982 enumerated those
same three painting styles, listing also their main seats in exile at that time:
1. dBus-bris (= sMan-rnying), followed in Dharamsala (seat of the Dalai Lama and his exile
government)
2. Karma sGar-bris, followed at Rumtek, Sikkim (seat in exile of the Karma-pa)
3. SMan-gsar or Khams-bris, followed at Tashijong (seat in exile of the Khams-sprul)
Ronge, son of the outstanding painter Rang-dge bs Tan-'dzin-yongs-du from Lha-thog Khams-pa-sgar in
Khams (original seat of the Khams-sprul), differentiated between several Khams styles, identifying a few
paintings as "sMan-ris of Khams, "6 though erroneously asserting (p. 341) that one painting from the sGar-
bris tradition of dPal-spungs and Si-tu was a mixture of sGar-bris and Man-bris. He also repeated the
assertion that the New Menri led to the Lhasa court style, though it is not clear on what authority.
The painting of Guru Rinpoche's Copper-Mountain Paradise, no. 192 (Ru 111), p. 474 f., is attributed
(p. 476) to nineteenth-century successors to Zhu-chen's Man-ris school in Derge. But sMan-ris schools do
not allow a painter to shade with indigo the outer edges of clouds or to leave a horizon unpainted in this way.
This is clearly a later Khams Karma sGar-bris, though with a landscape darker green than normal.
It should be noted that the painting illustrating an episode of Zhu-chen's life presented in my book of
1996 does not represent a sMan-ris style.57 Indeed, Zhu-chen's own main collaborators Lha-dga' and his
brother were from Karma Lha-steng and would be expected to have followed a Kar-shod-pa style, i.e. a
Karma Gar-bris style preserved near Karma monastery in Chamdo county (rdzong).
The depiction of the Buddha's birth at Lumbini, no. 11 (Ru 572), p. 155 f., is correctly identified in the
catalogue as following an original printed from Derge. But these block-prints were used as models all over
Tibet, and one has to differentiate clearly the block-print from a painting based on it. Therefore it is not sure
the painting is from "Eastern Tibet, Kham, Derge": indeed, the coloring speaks against this. Solid dark blue
is not known to have been used in Derge for skies. If this basically sMan-ris painting is from Khams, then
perhaps it came from a more provincial center of art.
Other attributions to "Derge" are based on this one piece, all with solid ultramarine skies: no. 126 (Ru
38), no. 127 (Ru 56), and no. 180 (Ru 210). See also no. 6 (Ru 414), p. 146, "touches of ultramarine could
indicate link with Derge schools," though this is surely Karma sGar-bris of Khams. On p. 494, glossary
under "Derge school," a tradition by that name was asserted to have been an important school of painting
that flourished in Derge in recent centuries (cf. also p. 71, col. 1). Such a "Derge school" is unknown to
Tibetan authorities known to me. Since the nineteenth century, at least two styles flourished in the Derge
kingdom: the Khams-bris (of Phur-bu-tshe-ring) and the sGar-bris (of nearby dPal-spungs). I cannot classify
these provincial-looking paintings, though they are certainly not in the two high styles patronized by the
Derge kings and lamas.
I wonder why "White Vajradhara Father-Mother," no. 167 (Ru 382), p. 424 f., is said to be "Eastern
Tibetan (?). "The dark blue sky make one immediately suspect a g Tsang Man-ris. The same may apply to
the paintings of Mila Repa's life, nos. 100 and 101 (Ru 180, 183), p. 312 ff. In any case, they are definitely
not in the Karma Gar-bris of Khams: the skies are too dark.
The authors refer to "The Fourth Shamarpa," no. 110 (Ru 2), p. 328 f., as "Eastern Tibetan, second half
of the 16th century." This is probably an early-sixteenth-century portrait and "biography" of the Fourth
Zhwa-dmar painted by a follower of the sMan-ris. It is not an example of an early sGar-bris. See also the
portrait of probably the same Zhwa-dmar (see p. 85, pl. 3), which was seemingly made in about the same
55. Namgyal G. Ronge (1982). p. 334. This early attempt at classification has, strangely enough, been completely
overlooked in later studies. A still earlier attempt, A. Neven (1978), pp. 42-25 and 51, nos. 26-28 and 42-45,
confused dBus-bris and gTsang-bris: see Jackson 1996, p. 366, n. 807.
56. Ronge 1982, p. 337, spoke for example of a (Khams) Man-ris popular in Ri-bo-che, Nang-chen and Ga-khog,
57. Jackson 1996, p. 313, pl. 63.



Painting Styles in the Rubin Collection
107
time as the autobiographical thangka and may represent an early central-Tibetan Man-ris of about the
same period.
Rhie (p. 68) compares another Zhwa-dmar portrait (Rhie and Thurman 1996, no. 113) with the Tenth
Karma-pa's paintings in the context of Eastern Tibetan styles of the second half of seventeenth century. It
would be better to leave out the Tenth Karma-pa from such stylistic discussions since he was a special case,
not mainstream in any sense. He left no school behind and his eccentric style is not known to have
had imitators.
Rhie's remarks, p. 68, about stylistic developments in the second half of the seventeenth century in
eastern Tibet remain highly hypothetical and, as she readily admits, the styles are still "difficult to assess for
this period." It would be better to leave out "eastern Tibet" as a category for pre-eighteenth-century works
until several typical examples have been firmly dated and attributed. Even then, "Eastern Tibetan" remains
too broad, if one cannot specify whether from Khams or A-mdo.
4.d. A-MDO-BRIS
A-mdo was home to the famous painting center of Re-bkong, one thangka of which has been documented
by K. Tanaka (1999), p. 150 f., no. 67. We are also fortunate to have photographs (by Rob Linrothe) of scroll-
paintings from this tradition from no later than the 1940s available on the tibetart.com website. Rob Linrothe
has finally put this tradition on the map with a detailed article on its recent history ("Creativity, Freedom and
Control in the Contemporary Renaissance of Rebgong Painting," Tibet Journal, vol. 26-3/4, 2001, pp. 5-91).
The distinctive features of some later Man-ris paintings from A-mdo seem to include a love of
symmetry in the overall composition and outlined clouds with trailing tails and bright pastel colors. Pointed
mountains sometimes loom prominently on the horizons of landscapes. Skies are a nearly uniform (i.e.
mostly unshaded) dull dark-blue.
A few more paintings from A-mdo have already been published in Bod kyi nang bstan lha ris kyi sgyu
rtsal (mTsho-sngon, m Tsho-sngon mi-dmangs dpe-skrun-khang, 1987, reprinted 1994), color plates 4-7. Note
that the four thangkas reproduced on the front and back of the dust jacket (Buddha Sākyamuni, Avalokitesvara,
Tsongkhapa and Padmasambhava) are in a different style, evidently that of g Tsang Tashilhunpo and Ka'-chen
Blo-bzang-phun-tshogs. The paintings in the Rubin collection from A-mdo almost certainly include no. 126
(Ru 38) "Tsong Khapa and Life Scenes," and possibly no. 2 (Ru 39) "Shakyamuni."
My previous tentative attribution of one painting to A-mdo (Jackson 1996, p. 105, fig. 35) may need
correcting to the nearby border district of rGyal-mo-rong, southeast of A-mdo. (The late "A-mdo Lha-bzo"
Jamyang, some of whose work was reminiscent of this style, came not from A-mdo proper, but from nearby
Gyal-mo-rong.) My attribution as "seemingly painted by an artist from A-mdo" has been followed by Rhie
and Thurman 1999, fig. 30.
Regarding "Scenes of the Avadana Kalpalata," no. 10 (Ru 250), p. 154, Rhie states, “This more closely
resembles some A-mdo works. The coloring is dominated by olive-yellow green." Rhie, p. 69. similarly
notes a difference between some later copies of Si-tu Pan-chen's rTogs brjod dPag bsam 'khri shing
paintings, suggesting that some were from A-mdo. She may be right. At least the paintings seem to come
from somewhere in the far-eastern borderlands of Tibet. The artists have copied Si-tu compositions, but they
were not trained in a true sGar-bris style of Khams or mTshur-phu. It is good to distinguish copies from
within a tradition from those coming from without. Here, judging by the facial features, the painters worked
in a provincial style from some Sino-Tibetan border region.
4.e. Ching Dynasty Court Art (China)
The elegant painting of a Gelukpa lama no. 135 (Ru 286), p. 368 f., is not eastern Tibetan art. The fields of
evenly distributed stylized clouds mark it as a late Sino-Tibetan work done in the Ching imperial court style
documented by Theresa Tse Bartholomew. Note that this was the style called "Kadampa" by Chogyam
Trungpa 1975, p. 16.
58. Theresa Tse Bartholomew 1997, p. 104 ff.



108
David Jackson
A work possibly from northwestern China or Mongolia is no. 58. Its obviously foreign flavor marks it
as from somewhere outside the "Central Regions Tibet."
Conclusions
There is danger in trying to force all extant paintings into the Procrustean bed of the few well-known
traditional stylistic categories. Where no firm documentation exists, silence may be preferable. We are still
at the beginning of such studies, and whatever mistakes we make may well be repeated forever
In the same way, circumspection is needed when making regional attributions. Why even speculate if
hard evidence is lacking? At the very least, one should first work out and then articulate a few rules of thumb
for identifying each regional school, with the knowledge that such criteria may not work with hybrid styles
or certain special iconographic types.
On the other hand, too much caution brings paralysis. Thus Rhie's suggestions should be welcomed for
what they are: brave attempts to expand the frontiers of stylistic competence in a field that has stagnated
too long.
Bibliography
Bartholomew, Teresa Tse 1992. "Three Thangkas from Chengde." In Tibetan Studies. Proceedings of the 5th
Seminar of the International Association of Tibetan Studies, Narita 1989, ed. by S. Thara and Z.
Yamaguchi, Naritasan, Naritasan Shinshoji, vol. 2, pp. 353-359.
- 1997. "Thangkas of the Qianlong Period.” In Jane Casey Singer and Philip Denwood, eds., Tibetan
Art: Towards a Definition of Style, pp. 104-117.
Blo-bzang-phun-shogs, bka-chen. bZo rig pa'i bstan bcos las sangs rgyas byang sems dang yi dam zhi
khro'i lha tshogs kyi cha tshad gsal ba'i ri mo don Idan kun gsal me long. Beijing, Mi-rigs-dpe-skrun-
khang, 1993.
Chogyam Trungpa 1975. Visual Dharma - The Buddhist Art of Tibet. Berkeley and London, Shambhala.
Doboom Tulku and Glenn H. Mullin 1995. Mitleid und Wiedergeburt in der tibetischen Kunst: Thangkas
aus dem Tiber House Museum in New Delhi. St. Gallen, Stiftung St. Galler Museen.
Essen, G-W., and T. T. Thingo 1989. Die Götter des Himalaya: Buddhistische Kunst Tibets. Die Sammlung
Gerd-Wolfgang Essen, 2 vols. Munich, Prestel-Verlag.
Fisher, Robert E. 1997. Art of Tibet. London, Thames and Hudson
Harris, Clare 1997. "Towards a Definition of Contemporary Painting Styles." In Jane Casey Singer and
Philip Denwood, eds., Tibetan Art: Towards a Definition of Style, pp. 262-269.
- 1999. In the image of Tibet: Tibetan Painting after 1959. London, Reaktion Books.
Heller, Amy 1999. Tibetan Art: Tracing the Development of Spiritual Ideals and Art in Tibet 600-2000.
Woodbridge, Suffolk, Antique Collector's Club
Huntington, Susan L., and John C. Huntington 1990. Leaves from the Bodhi Tree: The Art of Pāla India (8th-
12th centuries) and its International Legacy. Seattle and London, Dayton Art Institute in association
with the University of Washington Press.
Jackson, David 1993. "Apropos a Recent Tibetan Art Catalogue." Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde
Südasiens, vol. 37, pp. 109-130,
1996. A History of Tibetan Painting: The Great Painters and their Traditions. Beiträge zur Kultur- und
Geistesgeschichte Asiens, No. 15. Vienna, Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften,
1996.
1997. "Chronological Notes on the Founding Masters of Tibetan Painting Traditions." In Jane Casey
Singer and Philip Denwood, eds., Tibetan Art: Towards a Definition of Style, pp. 254-261.
- 1999. "Some Karma Kargyupa Paintings in the Rubin Collections." In Marylin M. Rhie and Robert A.
F. Thurman, Worlds of Transformation: Tibetan Art of Wisdom and Compassion, pp. 75-127.
Lo Bue, Erberto 1998. A Tibetan Journey: Dipinti dal Tibet, XIII-XIX secolo. Milano, Emil Mirzakhanian.
Liu I-Se, ed. 1957. Xizang fojiaoyishu [Tibetan Buddhist Art). Beijing, Wenwuchubansha.



Painting Styles in the Rubin Collection
109
Neven, A. 1978. Erudes d'art lamaique et de l'Himalaya. Bruxelles, Oyez.
Ngawang Samten, Ācārya 1986. Manjusri: An Exhibition of Rare Thankas. Sarnath and Leh, Central
Institute for Higher Tibetan Studies (Sarnath) and Central Institute for Buddhist Studies (Leh)
Phuntsok Sangpo 1996. The Clear Mirror Depicting the Pearl Rosaries of Thangka Painting of the Tsang-
pa Tradition of Tibet. Tibetan title: Thang sku'i sgyu risal mu tig phreng mdzes gtsang bris rab gsal me
long. [Darjeeling, the author?]
Rhie, Marylin M, and Robert A. F. Thurman 1991. Wisdom and Compassion: The Sacred Art of Tibet. New
York, Henry N. Abrams.
- 1996. Wisdom and Compassion: The Sacred Art of Tibet. Expanded edition. New York, Henry
N. Abrams.
- 1999. Worlds of Transformation: Tibetan Art of Wisdom and Compassion. New York, Tibet House
New York
Ronge, Namgyal G 1982. "Kunst und Stil in Tibet," in C. C. Mueller and W. Raunig, eds., Der Weg zum
Dach der Welt. Innsbruck, pp. 323-353.
Singer, J. C., and Philip Denwood, eds. 1997. Tibetan Art: Towards a Definition of Style. London, Laurence
King Publishing
Smith, E. Gene 1970. Introduction to Kongtrul's Encyclopedia of Indo-Tibetan Culture. Šatapitaka Series,
vol. 80. New Delhi, International Academy of Indian Culture.
Stein, Rolf A. 1987. La civilisation tibétaine. Édition définitive. Paris, L'Asiathèque.
Tanaka, Kimiaki 1997. Art of Thangka from Hahn's Collection, vol. 1. Seoul, Hahn Foundation for Museum.
- 1999. Art of Thangka from Hahn Kwang-ho Collection, vol. 2. Seoul, Hahn Foundation for Museum.
- 2001. Art of Thangka from the Hahn Kwang-ho Collection, vol. 3. Seoul, The Hahn Cultural Foundation,



TIBETAN TECHNOLOGIES OF THE SELF, PART II:
THE TEACHINGS OF THE EIGHT GREAT CONVEYANCESSE
Matthew T. Kapstein
(The University of Chicago and the École Pratique des Hautes Études, Paris)
If one had to name a single contribution as most representative of the wide-ranging Tibetological
interests for which our friend and mentor E. Gene Smith is universally admired, an appropriate
choice would be his renowned introduction to the 1970 facsimile edition of Kong-sprul's Treasury
of Knowledge (Shes bya kun khyab mdzod). There, he introduced a generation of scholars to the
great revival of Buddhist learning in 19th century Khams, the "Ris-med movement," and to its
leading exponents, 'Jam-dbyangs Mkhyen brtse'i dbang-po (1820-1892) and 'Jam-mgon Kong-
sprul Blo-gros-mtha'-yas (1813-1899). Thirty years after its initial publication, the ramifications
of Gene Smith's pioneering essay continue to shape our perceptions of later Tibetan Buddhist
history. Its influence was very much reinforced in particular by the determination with which,
during his years of service to the U.S. Library of Congress in New Delhi, he encouraged the
publication of the leading works of the great Ris-med masters, including, above all, Kong-sprul's
Five Great Treasuries (Mdzod chen Inga).
I was, of course, among those whose formation in the study of Tibetan Buddhism during the early 1970s
came strongly under the influence of the stellar regions that Gene Smith first explored. In particular, I was
very much intrigued by the treatment, in the writings of the Ris-med masters, of the leading approaches to
the cultivation of religious experience that characterized the main lineages of Tibetan Buddhist tantrism and
yoga, the so-called "eight great conveyances that are vehicles of attainment" (sgrub pa'i shing rta chen po
brgyad). In an earlier article, I surveyed in brief the structure of 'Jam-mgon Kong-sprul's encyclopædic
treatment of these, the Treasury of Instructions (Gdams ngag mdzod). That article may serve (and indeed
was originally drafted) as an introduction to the translation that follows, drawn from the detailed catalogue
(dkar-chag) of the Treasury of Instructions. 'Jam-mgon Kong-sprul provides here in turn succinct accounts
of the chief teachings of each of the eight conveyances. His discussion covers the same ground as does the
analogous section of the Treasury of Knowledge, but much more concisely
Given the nature of its contents, the passage translated here could be expanded by virtually limitless
annotation - indeed, the entire Treasury of Instructions might well serve as commentary! My approach to
annotation in this case, however, is minimal, and I have added primarily just those explanations required for
basic understanding. These are most often gleaned from the Treasury of Knowledge. In my article mentioned
above, the reader may find references to some of the relevant secondary literature.
The Instructions of the Eight Conveyances: Translation
In general, though it appears that here, in the land of snows, a great many major and minor traditions
belonging to lineages of attainment have emerged, those renowned as "the eight great conveyances" are
preeminently comprehensive, or well-established. As the great learned and accomplished master
Prajñrärasmi fi.e. 'Phreng-po gter-ston Shes-rab-'od-zer, b. 1517] has said:
The lord of creatures (Avalokiteſvara) in the land of snows, as prophesied by the Conqueror,
Was the sole intention of the unique teaching
Of the ancient religious king, the single divine monarch,
Who was the Second Teacher in this glacial enclosure.
And the eight great pillars, upholding the lineages of attainment in this northern land, were:
The definitive translator, Pa-gor Bai-ro-tsa-na;
The prince of the Conqueror's line, 'Brom-ston the layman;
The great learned and accomplished master, Khyung-po Rnal-'byor-pa;



Tibetan Technologies of the Self, Part II
The great bilingual guru, 'Brog-mi;
The lord of yogins, venerable Mar-pa;
Dam-pa rgya-gar, who dwelt on the plain of attainment;
The translator of Gyi-jo;
and learned and accomplished O-rgyan-pa.
These eight great pillars, [upholding the lineages of attainment in this glacial enclosure,
Were well-descended from the glorious Vajradhara.
Theirs is the legacy of former accomplished masters -
Those desiring liberation should follow their paths.
Just so, the magical display of the lords of the three families, renowned as the three ancestral religious kings
of Tibet, who came forth successively, were most gracious, wondrously generating the enlightened attitude
and engaging in) enlightened activities. Thus it came about that the solar light of the Conqueror's teaching
pervaded the dark valleys of the snowy land. The heart of the teaching that thus emerged is (found in the
eight great conveyances that are lineages of attainment.
1. Snga-'gyur Rnying-ma, "the Ancient Translation School"
In general, the Rnying-ma, or Ancient Translation School, possesses a great many meditational sequences
belonging to each of the three yogas of the inner tantras of skillful means, which figure among the divisions
of the nine vehicles. Nonetheless, they may be concisely summarized in this pair: representational and
nonrepresentational [forms of meditation). It says in the Three Stages (Rim gsum):
There is said to be a twofold distinction
The stage of representational meditation
And the meditation of suchness.
Therefore, in the present instance, we shall set forth as the root the meditational sequence of Atiyoga, the highest
pinnacle of the nine vehicles, which is final among the trio of [the stages of] creation, perfection and Great
Perfection (Rdzogs-pa chen-po). If the expression "Great Perfection") is explained on the basis of the term
mahäsandhi, it is great concentration" (mahāsamādhi), or, it is "great absorption" (mahādhyāna). It therfore
has the significance of "unsurpassed pristine cognition," in which all phenomena of samsāra and nirvāņa
naturally arise in the expanse of the unique abiding nature [of reality], surpassing the intellectualized doctrinal
systems of the eight [lower] vehicles. As to its divisions, it says in the Great Array (Bkod-pa chen-po):
The Mental Class is for those involved in thought,
The Spatial Class for those involved in space,
And the Esoteric Instructions are for those who are free from sequential exertions.
Just so, it is well-known that the Great Perfection has three classes according to the relative degrees of
profundity whereby it makes naturally emergent pristine cognition into the path.
Among them, the exoteric Mental Class (sems-sde) is liberated from the extreme of renunciation, for
one has realized that all phenomena have transcended causal and conditional effort and attainment in the
play of mind-as-such alone. Among the subdivisions of the Mental Class) there are seven, such as that
which holds the result to be the original locus of mind.
The esoteric Spatial Class (klong-sde), free from activity, is liberated from the extreme of antidotes, for
one has realized that, because all phenomenal manifestations neither arrive in nor depart from the space of
Samantabhadri, there is no getting away from the expanse of the naturally present Three Bodies. There are
four (subdivisions of the Spatial Class] the trio of White, Black and Variegated; and the Infinite Expanse.
The secret and profound Esoteric Instructional Class (man-ngag-sde) is free from the extremes of both
renunciation and antidote, for one has realized that particularly characterized mode of being wherein the
significance of all phenomena - ground, path, and result - is the indivisible union of primordial purity and
spontaneous presence. This has three (subdivisions): Oral Discourse, Random, and that which is Taught in
the Unique Texts of the Tantras. As it says in the All-Accomplishing King (Kun-byed rgyal-po):



112
Mathew T. Kapstein
The six vehicles of definitive attainment
Are taught to be error in the Great Perfection."
So it is that the objects adhered to in the sūtras and in the inner and outer mantras, up to and including
Anuyoga, are all merely tenets grasped by the intellect. For this reason, the Great Perfection) clearly teaches
the particular ways whereby one falls into the error of not seeing the original abiding nature of reality just as
it is. The pristine cognition of the Great Perfection transcends the eight aggregates of consciousness,
including thought and speech, cause and result. It is that great freedom from elaboration, in which all mind
and mental events attain to peace in the expanse [of reality). Because the naturally emergent reality of
awareness, free from activity, the natural disposition of the great transcendence of intellect, itself abides in its
self-possession and is otherwise uncontrived, the appearance of its expressive power as ephemeral taint
passes away, naturally dissolving into the natural expanse. For these reasons, this way is particularly superior
to all of the lower philosophical and spiritual systems. For as it says in the Tantra of the Great Natural Arising
of Awareness (Rig-pa rang-shar chen-po'i rgyud):
Ema! The Great Perfection that is Ati
Falls into no partiality at all;
Self-emergent, the point of its action is pristine cognition.
As, for example, the predatory lion
Vanquishes all beasts of prey,
So the natural articulation of the Great Perfection vanquishes the lower vehicles;
The natural articulation of the Great Perfection gets right to the heart of the matter.
Beginning thus, it teaches at length the uncommon, definitively secret view and meditation. Moreover, the
Great Array of Ati (A-ti bkod-pa chen-po), after teaching at length the manner in which (the Great
Perfection) is especially exalted above view and meditation involving adherence to conceptual
investigations, says:
Therefore, this nucleus of the definitive secret
Is like a lamp compared to the dark,
An elephant compared to a cow,
A lion among the beasts,
Or a horseman among pedestrians;
It is especially exalted above all.
This is illustrative of what (the Great Perfection) extensively reveals.
Concerning the essential points of the path: The Great Perfection possesses the unsurpassed instructions
of the fourfold liberation, which is a special doctrine. In particular, obtaining the empowerment of the
expressive power of awareness, that belongs to the secret cycles of the Esoteric Instructional Class, one
whose faith and commitments have not declined, and who cultivates the daytime and nighttime yogas to the
extent possible, even if failing to reach the original ground of liberation during this lifetime, will achieve the
great inspiration of the eleventh level, Universal Light, at the time of release from the bonds of the body,
owing to the blessing of the lineage of awareness holders and the power of the truth of reality, having first
beheld the emanational fields of the ten directions immediately upon practicing the recollection of
emanational fields (during the intermediate state following death). This is taught in the Great Array of Ati:
During the last five centuries, the Age of the Dregs,
This secret nucleus will appear in the human world.
The fortunate individuals who become its adherents,
Before whom this nucleus appears,
Will all pass to the unchanging level.
If, because during the Age of the Dregs,
life is short and illness plentiful,
You don't attain confidence in the significance of the nucleus,



Tibetan Technologies of the Self, Part II
113
Then, beholding this, great inspiration will be realized
On the eleventh level, Universal Light, the field of emanation,
Where, through purely miraculous birth,
one becomes free from the bonds of the womb.
2. Bka'-gdams, "the School of Transmitted Precept and Instruction"
The tradition of precepts of the sole divine master of the land of snows, the glorious venerable lord Atiśa,
has as its significance the realization of the totality of the conquerors' transmitted doctrine as the esoteric
precepts whereby an (ordinary) individual may become a buddha. It is said that its lineage holders are
adorned in body with four deities, adorned in speech with the three baskets of doctrine, and adorned in mind
with the three higher trainings.
The four deities are: the master of the teaching, Sakyamuni; the master of loving kindness and compassion,
Avalokitesvara; the remover of outer obstacles, Tārā; and the remover of inner obstacles, Acala. Because the
three baskets are the expression, and the three higher trainings, the expressed meaning, they are combined
together (as a single group of three), making seven divine doctrines of which the Bka'-gdams-pa) are well-
known to be the masters. [Their teaching] has come down in the three [categories of] Textual Tradition (gzhung-
pa), Instructional Tradition (gdams-ngag-pa) and Esoteric Precept Tradition (man-ngag-pa).
Concerning the first of these, the Textual Tradition: the Garland of Birth Stories (Jätakamāla) and the
Collection of Purposeful Sayings (Udānavarga) are the texts generating faith; the Compendium of Lessons
(Sikşāsamuccaya) and the Introduction to the Conduct of a Bodhisattva (Bodhicaryävatāra) are the texts
teaching conduct; and the Bodhisattva Level (Bodhisattvabhūmi) and the Ornament of the Sūtras of the
Greater Vehicle (Mahāyānasūtrālamkāra) are the texts of meditative concentration. The practices of study
and teaching focus preeminently upon those six.
Concerning the Instructional Tradition: One is guided with reference to the four truths of suffering,
origination, cessation, and the path in both their emergent and reverse order. And in the Esoteric Precept
Tradition, there is the experiential cultivation of the Precious Volumes of Secret Doctrine (Gsang-chos glegs-
bam rin-po-che). As it says in that text (gzhung):
Remember the guru, who is the object of refuge.
Make body the nature of divinity,
And continually employ speech in mantra-recitation.
Think on beings without exception as parents.
Examine the abiding nature of mind as emptiness.
Directed by the rudder of these five,
You will reach the purification of all fundamental virtues!
Thus, the path is formed by the Sixteen Seminal Points (Thig-le bcu-drug) of conventional and absolute
reality that are derived from these five recollections of guru, deity, mantra, compassion and emptiness. 15
The Textual and Instructional Traditions are taught in unison in the venerable Atiśa's composition, the
Lamp of the Path to Enlightenment (Byang-chub lam-gyi sgron-ma). Because, until liberation and
omniscience are attained, there is no way not to enter into this tradition of the path, it is famed as the
sequence of the path of enlightenment (Byang-chub lam-rim), or the sequence of the path of the three
persons (Skyes-bu gsum-gyi lam-rim). Its expressed meaning is given in that text (gzhung):
One must know there to be three persons:
Lesser, middling and superior.
Accordingly, "person" is equivalent to the Sanskrit) puruşa, which refers to potency. Therefore, it is with
reference to one who has the potency to achieve the goals of future lives, and so forth, that one speaks of
"person" in this context. At the very outset, the manner of adhering to a spiritual benefactor and the difficulty
of obtaining this ease and endowment (that characterize a fortunate human birth) are the foundations for the
paths of all three [types of person), and so are taught as the prerequisites. Then, as sublime Nāgārjuna
has said:



114
Mathew T. Kapstein
First, the doctrine of higher stations,
Later, that by which definitive attainment is won;
For, having obtained the higher stations,
Gradually one comes to definitive attainment.18
Accordingly, at the outset, turning from obsessive attachment to this life one gains the potency to realize
what is to be accepted and rejected with respect to deeds and their results, in order to obtain worldly
happiness for oneself alone - such is the lesser person. The actual practice of this one's path consists of the
four cycles [of doctrines) whose objectives are impermanence, the consequences of the evil destinies, going
for refuge, and deeds with their results.
Then turning from obsessive attachment to the whole of samsāra, for the sake of liberation from it, one
gains the potency to realize the path of the three [higher) trainings in the appropriate manner - such is the
middling person. Here, with respect to vehicles, there are both those of the pious attendants (śrāvaka) and
self-centered buddhas (pratyekabuddha). With respect to the objects of meditation, there are the four truths
and dependant origination, the coarse and subtle [contemplations of the selflessness of the individual,
et cetera.
Perceiving the two extremes of being and quiescence to be flawed, one gains the potency to bear the
burden of arraying all creatures on the level of the buddha - such is the greater person. Here, with respect
to views, there are the Middle Way (Madhyamaka) and Mind Only (Cittamätra), and, with respect to
vehicles, the divisions of both sūtra and mantra. Proceeding from the distinctive feature of the path, namely,
the generation of the enlightened attitude, these teach the manner in which one trains, in general and in
particular, in the conduct of the Conquerors' offspring, along with the result [of that training)
Generally speaking, the expression "three persons" occurs in some (Indian śāstras) such as the
Viniſcayasamgrahani and the commentaries on the Abhidarmakoſa. The sequences of experiential
cultivation are explained in the two Ornaments [i.e. Mahāyānasūtrālamkāra and Abhisamayalamkāra), in
the Yogācārabhūmi, etc. The significance (of those śāstras) is condensed (in the Bka'-gdams-pa teaching of
the three persons). Indeed, all of the transmitted precepts that were well-spoken by the Conqueror are
gathered together in these three sequences of the path. The types of spiritual training involving the
instructions for exchanging self and other, that are the quintessence of the experiential cultivation taught in
the Bodhicaryävatara, Siksāsamuccaya, etc., [as expressed) primarily in the three (groups of Indian texts
of lord [Atiba's) three gurus,'' are the culmination of the three path sequences, the root objects of meditation
on the path sequences, and the root objects of meditation for the path of the greater person. This, the relative
enlightened attitude, is an especially exalted means for deriving the profit of concentration, which involves
loving kindness and compassion.20
3. Lam-'bras, "the Path and its Result"
The lord of yogins, Virupa, experientially cultivated and realized the perfection stage of the three continua of
Hevajra, and composed a text of esoteric instructions about it. That aural lineage is renowned as the Precious
Oral Teaching of the Path with the Fruit (Gsung-ngag rin-po-che lam 'bras-bu dang bcas-pa), possessing four
epistemic authorities.21 Here, there are four ways of guiding disciples by means of the foura2 epistemic
authorities and four features of the aural lineage2 Referring to this guidance that is firm and extensive, in
accordance with the texts, the venerable, great Sa-skya-pahas said:
With the three visions (establishing) the path's ground,
The entire experiential cultivation may be known through the three continua.
Accordingly, in laying out the ground of the path, with reference to the impure vision (ma-dag-pa'i snang-
ba), which is first among the three visions that are taught in common with the vehicle of the transcendental
perfections, one cultivates conviction regarding the evil consequences of samsära, the difficulty of obtaining
the ease and endowment (of the human condition), and cause and effect with respect to deeds (karman). In
this way the path of the pious attendant (śrävaka) is fulfilled. With reference to the vision of spiritual



Tibetan Technologies of the Self, Part II
115
experience (nyams-kyi snang-ba), the yogin engaged ir the practice taught in common (with the vehicle of
the transcendental perfections cultivates loving kindness, compassion and the enlightened attitude, and thus
fulfills the common path of the Greater Vehicle. The yogin engaged in the uncommon (vehicle of mantras)
cultivates the path of the Vehicle of Indestructible Reality (Vajrayana), whereby s/he knows that all the
inconceivable visions of spiritual experience that arise are subsumed in fifteen (categories). Cutting off all
elaborations, s/he comes to recognize them whenever they occur, and so maintains the conquest of whatever
arises. Referring then to the pure vision (dag-pa'i snang-ba), one recollects the enlightened attributes of the
buddha, such as the inexhaustible wheel of ornament attained in the phase of the result, and thinking that "I
myself will arrive at such achievement," one cultivates enthusiasm. By cultivating these three visions] one
purifies the continuum of mind.
At the beginning of the uncommon path of mantra, one receives the empowerment of the causal phase
and abides in the fundamental commitments. As for the three continua of the actual path, with respect to the
causal continuum of the universal ground (kun-gzhi rgyu-rgyud), one is introduced to and cultivates the view
of the indivisibility of samsāra and nirvāṇa, the coalescence of limpidity and emptiness. In the methodical
continuum of the path (lam thabs-rgyud), four paths emerge in relationship to the four empowerments: the
path of the vase empowerment consists of the outer and inner stage of creation, and, receiving the
empowerment of the path phase, one cultivates the profound path of its significance during four daily
sessions, the path of the secret empowerment consists of vital energy (rlung) and inner heat (gtum-mo): the
path of the wisdom empowerment is another's body as messenger, and the path of the fourth empowerment
consists of the waves of indestructible reality (rdo-rje rba-rlabs) - by cultivating these three (latter) paths
of the stage of perfection the exemplary and actual pristine cognitions (dpe don ye-shes) are revealed. By
thus cultivating the four paths, in the mundane path the four views, including the three essences, emerge,
and on the transcending path, having run through the four limits of achievement, the five bodies of the
continuum of the result ('bras-rgyud) are disclosed.25
In brief, one prepares the ground of the path by means of the three visions, experientially cultivates the
actual practice by means of the three continua, resolves doubts by means of the four epistemic authorities
and four aural lineages, and determines the boundaries of the path by means of the five causal
coincidences 26 When one has thus undertaken its experiential cultivation, then, according to the guidance
of the extensive path, having come to know the three occasions in which the elements are gathered, one
becomes skilled in the seven esoteric precepts that bestow benefit and in the means to remove obstacles, and,
experientially cultivating them, arrives at the limit of proof.?? According to the guidance of the medium path,
there are five basic topics, and in the condensed path they are gathered in an enumeration of four. In any
case, starting with the phase of the path, the result is present in so much as it is attainable. Therefore, because
[this tradition) teaches the significance of the indivisibility of ground, path and result, it is renowned as the
Path and Result
4. Mar-pa Bka'-brgyud, "the Succession of Mar-pa's Precepts"
Among the great accomplished masters, the promulgators adhering to the lineage of the transmitted precepts
of lord Mar-pa the translator, the tradition of the precepts of venerable Näropa and Maitripa, there still exists
an oceanic totality of esoteric precepts primarily associated with the unsurpassed yoga, transcending what
can be indicated in speech. Nonetheless, if one summarizes the foremost points of meditation, they are
subsumed in the path of skillful means, the Six Doctrines of Nāropa (thabs-lam nā-ro chos-drug), and the
path of liberation, the Great Seal (grol-lam phyag-chen). Both are gathered by three great, adamantine
bonds; for as it says in the Brief Clarification of the Five Sequences (Rim-Inga bsdus-gsal) and in the Later
Handbook (Ka-dpe phyi-ma):
The abiding nature of reality, the path,
And the sequence whereby the result is born ..
Thus, the ground is the abiding nature of reality, the path is the sequence to be traversed, and the result is
the way of disclosure. Among them, abiding nature includes both the abiding nature of the reality of the



116
Mathew T. Kapstein
body,29 and the abiding nature of the reality of mind. Each is further divided as coarse, subtle or extremely
subtle, thus forming the ground for purification.
The path includes maturation and liberation, among which the conferral of empowerment matures the
continuum (of the disciple's body-and-mind) in accordance with whatever may be his or her degree of
capacity - superior, middling, or inferior. Proceeding thereafter, the beginner experientially cultivates the
liberating (stages of creation and perfection alternately and, after having thus practiced, simultaneously.
und With respect to the stage of perfection, too, both the path of means and the path of liberation are
experientially cultivated as purifiers that accord with the ground of purification, whereby the result -
consisting of such common ones as the ten signs, eight attributes, four enlightened activities, etc., and the
supreme accomplishments including the seven limbs, eight lordships, four bodies, and five pristine
cognitions - are actually obtained in this lifetime or in the intermediate state, according to the distinctions
of fortune and effort.2o
Concerning, then, the path of means, the Six Doctrines: relying on the means, such as bliss, this is a
profound and quick path that discloses the pristine cognition of the Great Seal. It is the experiential
cultivation undertaken by those who are of sharp acumen and are energetic, that has come down through the
tradition of the injunctions of glorious Nāropa. The foremost foundational grounds [for the visualization
practices of the stage of creation that must precede the stage of perfection) are Cakrasamvara, Hevajra,
Mahāmāya, Vajracatuhpitha, and Guhyasamāja, which are the "five special tantras," and Kalacakra, which
is universal. Because this (teaching of the Six Doctrines) is the consummation of their intention, it is well-
known as the path of means related to the tantras." As it says in the Genuine Proof of the Transmitted
Precepts (Bka' yang-dag-pa'i tshad-ma):
They are inner heat, action seal,
apparition, dream, and luminosity,
The intermediate state, transference,
T
and the "penetration of the city."
Just so, it is well-known that the inner heat is the root of the path, the action seal is the derivation of profit
on the path, the apparitional body is the path's tree of life, dream is the measure of warmth on the path,
luminosity is the heart of the path, the intermediate state is resolution on the path, transference is an
invitation along the path, and the penetration of the city is the continuity of the path. Among them, inner
heat, the apparitional body, dream, and luminosity are renowned as the "four root doctrines," which form
the profound path that discloses the coalescence of no-more-learning in a single lifetime. For those
unfortunates who do not disclose the result in this lifetime by means of them, the precepts of the intermediate
state and transference are added to make six doctrines. The action seal and penetration of the city are the
limbs providing a derivation of profit and continuity, and so are not counted separately.
The foregoing follows the account of Lord Sgam-po-pa and is adhered to by all the Dwags-po Bka'-
brgyud (schools] as if with one voice. The many other ways of dividing and combining them may all be
subsumed in that explanation. For instance, Lord Mar-pa held them to be summarized as "four doctrinal
pairs pertaining to the achievement of buddhahood"; Rngog-pa, father and son, made the essence of the six
doctrines into the two categories of) intermingling and transference; venerable Mi-la-ras-pa spoke of the
introduction to the eight intermediate states; Te-pu-pa held there to be four pairs with eight aspects; and Ras-
chung-pa held there to be either a triple cycle of intermingling, or a ninefold cycle of intermingling
and transference.12
As for the path of liberation, the Great Seal, according to the approach of this precious lineage there are
both a tradition that accords with the sūtras, according to which one enters into balanced absorption
following the instructions on witholding subjective mentation with respect to the objective luminosity that
is free from elaboration, and a tradition that accords with the tantras, which is distinguished by emphasizing
the adamantine body and the pristine cognition that is born perforce of the Great Seal of bliss-and-emptiness,
the yoga of co-emergence. The latter has already been mentioned above. Concerning the former: It has come
down primarily from the tradition of the injunctions of lord Maitripa. Its essence is the non-dual pristine



Tibetan Technologies of the Self, Part II
117
cognition that is profound and limpid, pervading all samsāra, nirvāṇa, and it is endowed with three
distinctions. If it is explained etymologically on the basis of the term mahamudrā, it is a seal (mudra)
because none of the phenomena of samsāra, nirvāņa or the path surpasses it; and it is great (mahā) because
no phenomena are superior to it. The compound (mahā-mudrā] expresses their coreferentiality. It may be
subdivided into the trio of the Great Seal of ground, path and result. Concerning the first because liberation
and bewilderment have arisen according to one's realization or non-realization of the significance of the
phenomena of samsāra or nirvana, nothing surpasses that cabiding nature); and it is great" because, besides
that, there is no other body of reality to be sought out. As for the second: because, even while experientially
cultivating that to which one has been introduced through the esoteric instructions of the guru, neither
knowledge nor knowables surpass its radiance, it is a "seal"; and because, besides that, there is no other
pristine cognition of the Buddha to be sought out, it is "great". Third: because, when the enduring nature of
the ground is disclosed after ephemeral taints have been removed by the path, no aspect of the play of body
and pristine cognition surpasses its essence, it is a "seal"; and because it is the culminating level, it is "great".
Moreover, concerning coemergence, there are the teachings of] both "natural coemergence" (rang-
bzhin Ihan-skyes) and "coemergence (realized through) the bliss of melting'" (zhu-bde lhan-skyes). Of them
(the first] is not merely the inferential and discursive meditation that, at the limits of investigation, fails to
obtain (a determinate being as its object], but is called the "yoga of comergence") because it brings about
a union (yoga, sbyor-ba) with genuine coemergence, having made a path of nonconceptual direct perception;
for it is free from the conceptual grasping of unimpeded appearance-and-awareness. As the venerable Sgam-
po-pa has said:
The trio of mind, thought and the body of reality
Are coemergent from the very first:
Is this not called the "yoga of coemergence"
Because their union is established by these instructions?
Regarding the experiential cultivation of that path, Tilopa says:
Aho! This is self-presenting pristine cognition,
Beyond verbalization, outside the intellect's range.
1, Tilopa, have nothing to teach:
Adducing this by oneself, within oneself, it may be known.
Just so, having recognized the ground, the abiding reality of the view, one experientially cultivates it by the
meditation of the path in the manner of Tilopa's well-known six doctrines":34
Not reflecting, not thinking, not examining,
Not meditating, not minding, establish a natural disposition.
This comes to the same point as does Maitrīpa's Doctrinal Cycle of Non-intellection (Yid-la mi-byed-pa'i
chos-skor). The venerable Sgam-po-pa, above and beyond that, relied on lord Atiśa's composition, the
Second Armor of the Great Seal (Phyag-chen go-cha gnyis-pa), and the system of guidance of the Bka-
gdams tradition (and so redacted the teaching as follows:) there is the fourfold preliminary yoga, which
gives rise to meditation in those in whom it has not arisen; the three introductions, 16 which bring it on to the
path when it has arisen; and the means to bring forth the profit of it, which generate the qualities of
enlightenment. In this way, without regard to gradations of the disciples'] acumen, the guidance is all-
pervadingly maintained, so that when the continuum [of mind) is trained, even those of inferior acumen are
transformed so as to become superior and therefore naturally liberated. This is an unsurpassed instruction,
skilled in such means.
Among the followers (of the Mar-pa Bka'-brgyud tradition), the glorious Phag-mo-gru-pa and 'Bri-
gung 'Jig-rten-gsum-mgon, father and son, emphasized the instruction of the Fivefold [Great Seal, (phyag-
chen) Inga-ldan); the glorious Karma-pa matured and liberated beings by means of the Four-pointed Wheel
of Reality (gnad-bzhi chos-nyid-kyi 'khor-lo) and the Introduction to the Three Bodies (sku-gsum ngo-
sprod); among the glorious 'Brug-pa Bka'-brgyud, the Upper Tibetan 'Brug-pa (stod-'brug) [taught) Eight



118
Mathew T. Kapstein
Great (Systems of] Guidance (khrid-chen brgyad) and the Lower Tibetan 'Brug-pa (smad-'brug) (taught]
the Fivefold Austerity (thub-pa Inga-ldan); and the root Bka'-brgyud guided [their disciples] by means of
the path of the six cycles. As illustrated here, the four great, eight lesser and all of the numberless traditions
proceeding from them appear to have arrayed many disciples in the state of attainment; and thus they give
rise to faith alone.
5. Shangs-pa bka'-brgyud, the "succession of the precepts of Shangs"
Khyung-po Rnal-'byor, a learned and accomplished master who was endowed with the "five culminations,"
received fully the essential wisdom of a hundred and fifty Indian panditas and siddhas, and so came to be
renowned as one unrivalled in his knowledge of limitless approaches to the doctrine. In general, therefore,
one cannot make a one-sided estimation of the extent of his teaching. Nevertheless, in accord with the
widely renowned traditions of the uniquely sealed lineage of his successors, there are five "golden
doctrines" of the Shangs-pa:
A. The roots are the "six doctrines of Niguma."
B. The truck is the "Great Seal."38
C. The branches are the three means for integrating ordinary experience with the path."
D. The flowers are the red and white forms of the Sky-faring Goddess, Khecari.
E. The fruit is the realization that body and mind are deathless and without deviation.
These precepts were recorded by Khyung po Rnal-'byor on the basis of the Stanzas of Indestructible Reality
revealed by the primordial buddha Vajradhara and by Niguma, the dakini of enlightened awareness.
Therefore even the meditation topics and the prayers of supplication were never fabricated, altered or
corrupted by the mundane thoughts of ordinary individuals, and for this reason are like refined gold.
A. The Six Doctrines of Niguma
With reference to the six doctrines, the Stanzas of Indestructible Reality say:
Matured by the four empowerments, endowed with faith and with vigor,
Practicing the preliminary meditations upon impermanence, disgust with samsāra, and its hazards,
Whoever strives at this supreme path
Will attain buddhahood within six months, a year, or during this lifetime.
Accordingly, an individual who is spiritually matured by receiving the empowerments of the five tantras that
are taught in the Great Tantra of the Ocean of Jewels, or of the mandala of glorious Cakrasamvara, and who
has received the transmitted blessing of each of the Six Doctrines and has practiced well the common
preliminary meditations, first purifies herself or himself by the meditation called the purifying enclosure of
emptiness formed by the syllable A. Then, the six doctrines may be practiced in turn:
(a) By the practice of the path of skillful means the warmth of well-being naturally blazes
(b) By the practice of the apparitional body attachment and aversion naturally dissolve.
(c) By the practice of the lucid dream the subtle bewilderment that underlies all bewilderment is
naturally cleansed.
(d) By the practice of the radiant light ignorance is naturally dispelled.
When these four methods are established as the root of one's practice, the afflictions that arise
in the bewilderment of the four mundane states of being are removed.40 The remaining two
doctrines, then, are,
(e) the transference of consciousness, whereby buddhahood is attained without having realized it
during meditation in this lifetime, and
(f) the yoga of the intermediate state, whereby the Buddha's body of perfect rapture is realized,
These are practiced as appended meditational sequences for those who are lacking in vigor and acumen,
whereupon, according to the grades of excellence, mediocrity, or inferiority, one becomes liberated in one
or another of the three intermediate states."



Tibetan Technologies of the Self, Part II
119
B. The Great Seal
The learned and accomplished master Khyung-po Rnal-'byor-pa was exceedingly proud of the Stanzas of
Indestructible Reality that contain the precepts of the essential point that is incapable of intellectual
formulation. Therefore, he inserted the paper rolls (on which they were written) into a small Nepalese
amulet-box to wear around his neck. Thus the precepts became renowned as the Amulet-box Precepts of the
Great Seal (phyag-chen ga'u-ma). One first cultivates tranquility (zhi-gnas, samatha) and insight (thag-
mthong, vipasyana) through the preliminary practice of the "natural disposition of body, speech, and mind"
(rang-babs-gsum). Then, in the actual ground of the practice, the calling-down of the diamond-like pristine
cognition causes one to steal a glimpse that introduces (the Great Seal), whereupon, through the natural
dissolution of the four faults, all doubts with respect to the nature of mind itself are resolved. In the final
practice one sustains the Three Bodies, which have emerged spontaneously, and, by relying on the
extraordinary means of deriving profit from the practice and removing obstacles, the Great Seal, which is
the heart of the doctrine of all sütras and tantras, and the essence of all meditational precepts, becomes fully
manifest as the natural liberation which is the realization of the Four Bodies.
C. The Three Carry-overs
By carrying over all phenomena of appearance, sound and thought on to the path, through the essential
understanding that in actuality (they are the guru, the deity, and apparition, in a matter of months or a year
[one realizes the unity of] clarity and emptiness as supreme bliss and the Three Bodies are naturally realized.
D. The White and Red Forms of Khecara
By means of particularly exalted supplications and meditational topics one arouses the solar- and lunar-
colored (forms of] the Victoriously Transcendant Vajra-Woman, whereupon the Inner Heat of the unity of
bliss and emptiness, which is based on both passion and its dissolution in the four centers, blazes up.
Supported by that one comes to voyage in the space of supreme coalescence.
E. The Realization that Mind is Deathless and Unerring
The body is set on the path of spiritual freedom through (the practice of) thirty-two yogic exercises by which
deathlessness is achieved. Because one's own mind is primordially unborn it is established to be deathless
and supremely liberated in and of itself. The bodily mass, which is the fruit of karmic ripening, is an
assemblage of inanimate matter, devoid of any basis for a determination of birth or death. In fact, if one has
confidence based on the realization that the body itself has arisen as a mere mental projection, and that the
mind is devoid of birth or death, then bodily form becomes fixed in the Great Seal, the boundless expanse
in which there is no erring due to bewildering appearances, as the embodiment of the divine. It is taught that
through even some of these precepts the embodiment of coalescence (zung-'jug-gi sku) may be attained
during this lifetime, and that by merely hearing them one may achieve buddhahood in the Conquerors' Body
of Perfect Rapture during the Intermediate State. It says in the Stanzas of Indestructible Reality:
Those who experience this supreme path in practice,
During this lifetime or the Intermediate State, but not at some other time,
Naturally realize the Three Bodies in the indivisibility of emptiness and bliss,
And go forth to journey in utterly pure space.
It appears that of the doctrines of the dākini of pristine cognition Sukhasiddhi only the most profound Six
Doctrines of the Path of Skillful Means (thabs-lam chos-drug) and the Great Seal (precepts of] Pure Pristine
Cognition (phyag-chen dag-pa ye-shes) remain. The Sadhana that includes Four Deities (tha-bzhi dril-
sgrub), a precept of the mahāsiddha Rāhula, and [the precepts of the Efficacious Lord of Pristine
Cognition," a profound doctrine of Maitrīpa, also still exist. These appear really to possess a continuous
transmission of spiritual experience and blessing.
6. Nyon-myongs Zhi-byed, "the Pacification of Affliction"
Concerning the significance of the term zhi-byed: according to the ways of guidance that were introduced in
Tibet, having first turned the disciple away from the path of nonvirtue, one primarily causes the afflictions



120
Mathew T. Kapsteine r
of the mental continuum to be purified, whereby bodily baseness, disease, etc., resulting from previous
deeds, are provisionally pacified. Thus, because one has been made to bear up to the engagement in yoga,
this is called the "genuine doctrine of the pacification of suffering" - that is, the general denomination
("pacification") has come to apply to the particular (tradition called "Pacification"). As it says in the Mother
[i.e. the Transcendental Perfection of Discernment]: 23
The mantra that well-pacifies all suffering ...
A
And in the King of Tantras i.e. the Kālacakra Tantral:
Pacifying the pain of the three sufferings
The name (of this tradition) is coined on the basis of such sayings.
In essence it is the teaching of the transcendental perfection, but harmonized with mantra. Thus, it is
a special precept that combines into one the profound essentials of all sūtras and tantras. Generally speaking,
the lord among accomplished masters, Dam-pa Sangs-rgyas, took command of the sound and significance
of the unborn mantric phonemes, and by means of inconceivable secret [knowledge), in accord with the
dispositions and faculties of those requiring training, he revealed limitless gates of doctrine, [expressed in)
symbol, word and meaning. Therefore, his cannot be established to be a single tradition. Nonetheless, [he
always taught that] the disciples must possess the three fundamental vows in accord with their respective
careers.44 The path is extended by means of austerity. And the result is conduct on behalf of others. In these
three respects the guidance [according to the various traditions of Pacification) is generally in accord.
[Pha Dam-pa) originally composed the Triple Cycle of the Lamp (sgron-ma skor gsum), teaching the
three higher trainings as the concise means of experiential cultivation for those of inferior, middling and
superior acumen. Here in Tibet, the first among the three renowned descents of his injunctions - earlier,
middle and later - was the "Kashmiri tradition," in which all of the instructions of fifty-four accomplished
men and women were condensed into five essential points illustrated by five examples. The middle [descent]
consists of the traditions of Rma (Chos-kyi-shes-rab, b. 1055), So[-chung Dge-'dun-'bar, 1062-1128] and
Kam [Ye-shes-rgyal-mtshan, d. 1119), among which the tradition of Rma, relying on the lineage of meaning,
confers the introductions by means of sixteen (instructions that are like being] guided by the hand. Then,
relying on the lineage of the word, one's doubts are resolved through sixteen major points. In the So tradition,
the introduction is conferred in superior, middling or inferior ways, to those who are endowed with the three
essential points concerning resting in absorption, whereupon one undertakes experiential cultivation, being
endowed with the ten bonds. In the Kam tradition, despite the emergence of a very extensive tradition of
guidance, in later times it appears that only guidance on the significance of the Heart Sätra survived.
The final descent of the injunctions is the tradition of the bodhisattva Kun-dga' 46 This is the esoteric
precept of the Transcendental Perfection of Discernment, in harmony with secret mantra, whose root is the
introduction of innermost meaning that applies to the continuum of mind, whose means are adorned with
many virtues of causal coincidence, so that this is an esoteric precept for the experiential cultivation, at one
time, while on one seat, of all the teachings of the buddha. With reference to this, called the Methodical
Cycle of the Taintless Drop (Dri-med thigs-pa phyag-bzhes-kyi skor), one begins by conferring the four
profound symbolic empowerments that uniquely belong to this tradition and which cause the maturation of
[the disciple who is as yet) an immature foundation. Then, proceeding down the lane of the white red and
black systems of guidance, spiritual experience that has not emerged is caused to emerge. One makes the
blessings of the guru into the path, which causes realization that has not arisen to arise. To cut through the
elaborations that have not been cut through, one impresses the meaning on the mind by means of a mass of
words. Having summarized it thus, the actual guidance accords with the esoteric precepts of the seven
complete sittings":
(a) Those of superior acumen directly perceive the uncontrived, abiding reality of mind in its natural
state, which transcends apprehending subject and apprehended object. Thus, there is the White
Guidance, whose essential point is the naked perception of awareness, and which brings about the
realization of buddhahood all at once.



Tibetan Technologies of the Self, Part II
121
(b) The middling refine the seminal points of the three gates and their equal combination, completing
the path of the guru's four bodies. Thus, there is the Red Guidance, whose essential point is the
decisive exercise of devotion, by which the four bodies are attained in an all-surpassing leap.
(c) Because the least obtain the five paths whose entrance is gradual, there is the Black Guidance,
whose essential point is the resolution of the subtleties of instruction. Among these three (a-c), this
last includes (five subdivisions):
(c.1) The Path of Provisions is brought forth through spiritual refinement that relies on the
experiential cultivation of the five paths in a single sitting, having condensed the instructions
of the outer (vehicle of] definition into eight sections and a single root.
(c.2) The Path of Connection is weighed according to the measure of austerity, having relied on the
completion in a single sitting of the five sequential paths in which the motile vital winds blaze
up and are grasped [in accordance with the father tantras.
(c.3) The Path of Seeing resolves the aftermath, by relying upon the complete meditation of the
four seals in a single sitting, the experiential instructions of bliss (according to) the
mother tantras.
(c.4) The Path of Meditation brings forth the profit by means of the common savor, having relied
on the complete meditation on four yogas in a single sitting, or on four concentrations, which
are the instruction of innermost significance.
(c.5) The Culminating Path of Freedom from activity is then attained, having relied on the complete
meditation in a single sitting of the six-limbed yoga, the instruction of the natural liberation
of awareness.
This way, which had not formerly arisen in India or in Tibet, is the special doctrine of Dam-pa Sangs-rgyas:
outwardly, the revealed heart of the three baskets; inwardly, the jugular of the four tantras; secretly, the eye-
opener of the innermost significance. In reality, having released the seal of the transmitted precepts of the
däkinis, the measure of the attainment of the experiential cultivation of the entire teaching of the Buddha
during a single sitting is present here, and it is adorned with many superiorities of the causal coincidences
of its methods, as it says in the Path Sequence (lam-rim) of Zhig-po Nyi-seng:
The salt of the lineages of attainment in general,
The measure of the attainment of the great sequence of the path,
The kiss of the esoteric precepts of all sutras and tantras,
[Is found) in nothing else but this.
A further limb of that [Pacification) is the genuine doctrine that is renowned as the Demon Cutting Object
(bdud-kyi gcod-yu!). If one denominates it on the basis of that with which it is in positive agreement, [it is
so-called because the unsurpassed tantras teach many definitive orderings of conduct as the ways of
deriving the profit, for instance, "secret conduct," and "conduct of awareness. It says in the Mother:
One who wishes to practice the conduct of the profound transcendental perfection of discernment
must learn the following ...
Because it is the practical application of what this signifies, it has been labeled the "Object of Conduct."
But if one denominates it as the antidote to that which it opposes, it is so-called because, in the causal
phase of the transcendental perfections, one carries on to the path the truths of suffering and origination by
means of acceptance and rejection with respect to the four truths in their evolutionary and reverse sequences.
whereby one experientially cultivates the profound essential points of the antidote, i.e. the meditation
opposing [the afflictions) and (the realization of] the equal savor, so that this is the Demon Cutting
Object. As for the word and meaning of "cutting," it says in the Small Text (Gzhung-chung) of the
brahman Aryadeva:
Because it cuts to the root of mind,
Cuts out the five poisonous afflictions,
And cuts through all meditation involving extreme views,



122
Mathew T. Kapstein
Troubled conduct, hope and fear,
And also arrogance,
The term is ascertained to mean "cutting."
As for the meaning of "Object": the reason is that, because the afflictions that are the matter to be cut off are
born from mental involvement in inappropriate objects, yogins become engaged in those objects so as to
arouse the dispositions, whereupon they cut right through them.
Here, among the four Indian texts that spread in Tibet, among which are found both the "Male Cutting"
and "Female Cutting" derived from the lineage of Pha Dam-pa Sangs-rgyas, it is the latter [the "Female
Cutting"] that universally prevails nowadays. And here, first and foremost, is the "lineage of the experience
of accomplished masters" that was obtained from Ma-gcig, who was liberated in direct response to the
precepts. The textual basis for the view is the Transcendental Perfection of Discernment and the peculiarity
of its method is distinguished by mantra, so that it is held to be an intermingling of the realizations of sūtra
and mantra. As for the fundamental source of this path, it says in the Verse Summation of the Transcendental
Perfection of Discernment (Prajñrāpāramitasamcayagāthā, verse 237):
Through four causes the skillful bodhisattva is empowered
So that she is hard for the four mārās to vanquish, immovable indeed:
These are abiding in emptiness, refusal to renounce sentient beings,
Action that accords with word, and the possession of the Sugata's blessing,
Thus, one experientially cultivates the four points that are taught here: a view that abides in emptiness;
compassion that won't let go of sentient beings; the discipline of a bodhisattva who acts in accord with word;
and the blessing that is conferred by the Sugata.
As for the first, a view that abides in emptiness: at the outset, one abandons the view that the aggregates
of which one's continuum are formed constitute a self, and, with regard to any other sentient beings
whatsoever, one does not engage in perceptions of substance and mark; thus, one always abides in the
significance of selflessness.
Concerning the refusal to let go of sentient beings: one is especially loving towards corporeal beings
who are miserable, diseased, etc., and even regarding incorporeal spirits and demons, one avoid harmful
thoughts; and with great compassion turns (all those] back from harming sentient beings, thereby
introducing them to the path of enlightenment.
Acting in accord with word: renouncing coarse conduct, one generates the enlightened attitude and
avoids contradicting what one has thereby assented to.
The blessing that is conferred by the Sugata: having gone for refuge, one prays with fervent devotion to
the root and lineage gurus. On that basis, at the beginning of one's experiential cultivation of the instructions,
one obtains the uncommon empowerments [to make one) a worthy recipient.
In the actual ground (of the practice of the instructions, there are the tradition of the sütras, the tradition
of the mantras, the intermingling of the realization of sūtra and mantra, etc. -- these being the general
sources of the entire tradition of transmitted precepts. In the uncommon preliminary practice, one gathers
the accumulations inwardly, by means of the body, and invokes the direct descent of blessing through fervent
prayer. In the actual ground (of the practice), relying on the pursuit of awareness alone, one seeks out the
pith of mind. Causing the disciple(s)] to be seated in appropriate order, one teaches the means of absorption.
Relying on the opening of the sky-door, the significance of the Mother is introduced. Absorbed in equipoise,
one guards the natural disposition that is without speech, thought or utterance, and so attains the Body of
Reality during a single sitting. In the aftermath [following meditative absorption), as it says in the Bundle of
Injunctions (Bka-tshoms):
One cuts off the entanglements of obstructive objects,
Then cuts off the entanglements of unobstructed mind,
And cuts off the entanglements of hankering for fun.
The māras are divided as four,
But are subsumed in the demon (bdud, mära) of pride.



Tibetan Technologies of the Self, Part II
123
Thus, one cuts off the four māras, having freed oneself from hope and fear, renunciation and acquisition,
subject and object. With respect to that which it is difficult to cut through, one fearlessly presses on until it
is cut. Taking one's seat in a fearsome retreat, 50 as a method for deriving the profit, one exerts oneself in the
practices appropriate for] fearsome retreat, endowed with the instructions. When [fearful conceptions) are
aroused to the fullest extent, one intermingles the expanse [of reality) and awareness and, by means of the
visualized offering of one's body as food - the white dispensation, red dispensation, variegated dispensation,
etc. - in which pacification and wrath are mixed, positive and negative thoughts become equalized in a
single savor. Thus, demons seen outwardly and the ego grasped inwardly are delivered over to the limit of
selflessness, on which occasion one fulfills the complete measure [of this practice). In the end, having
acquired the three great confidences, the stages and paths are automatically traversed to their completion.
7. Rdo-rje'i rnal-'byor, "the Yoga of Indestructible Reality"
The meaning that is concealed by the expressions of indestructible reality in the synoptic tantras of the
unsurpassed (yoga), such as the Cakrasamvara and Hevajra, is clearly revealed in the glorious Kälacakru
system, including the Paramadibuddha, is this yoga of the great seal, called the "six-limbed yoga"
(sadangayoga). It is the supreme, culminating destination of all stages of perfection. Concerning the manner
of guidance on this path, it says in the Taintless Light (Vimalaprabhā):
The Transcendent Lord (Buddha) has taught three sorts of belief with respect to this mantra vehicle:
L at first, for the moment, one has belief in the tantra; then, belief in the guru; and then belief in
w oneself. In these three, the path of the authentic and perfect buddha is entirely complete.
Accordingly, endowed with these three sorts of belief, the path leading to union with the supreme
accomplishment is made pure. The object of attainment is the indestructible reality of pristine cognition, the
three secrets of the Tathāgata ['s body, speech and mind)
Concerning the Six-limbed Yoga of Attainment (Sgrub-byed sbyor-ba yan-lag drug), it says in the Root-
tantra of Kālacakra (Dus-'khor rtsa-rgyud):
The six limbs of yoga are held to be
Withdrawal, absorption,
Breath-control, so too restraint,
w Remembrance and concentration
Similar sayings are also found in the Guhyasamājottaratantra and in the Däkärava. The manner of
attainment [that is taught here consists of attainment by means of the four limbs of service and attainment
(bsnyen-sgrub yan-lag bzhi) 54 Thus, with reference to the entire completion of the four limbs of service and
attainment in the combination of the preliminary practice and actual ground of the stage of perfection itself,
one establishes the ground, the embodiment of the deity, which is the limb of service, by means of the
preliminary practice of the four non-referentialities. The actual practice consisting of withdrawal,
absorption and breath-control, is the limb of further service itself. By means of the three seals, there is the
remembrance of desire, which is the limb of the attainment with respect to the unchanging bliss of great
desire. Because meditative concentration actually brings about the attainment of the body of pristine
cognition, this is the limb of great attainment.
With reference to the actual manner of attainment: withdrawal and absorption are the yogas whose
essence is the indestructible reality of body, whereby the purification of the central channel achieves all
aspects of the body of indestructible reality. Breath-control and restraint are the yogas of the indestructible
reality of speech, whereby the control of vital energy causes the energies of the right and left channels to
enter the central channel, and restraint stabilizes them, and so achieves all aspects of the indestructible
reality of speech. Afterwards, remembrance is the yoga of the indestructible reality of mind, whereby,
relying on the three seals, that enlightened mind that has melted is grasped by incorruptibility, and all aspects
of the indestructible reality of mind are attained. Concentration is the indestructible reality of pristine
cognition, whereby that very bliss is conjoined in indivisible embrace with the body of form, and all



124
Mathew T. Kapstein
aspects of the indestructible reality of pristine cognition, the coalescence of bliss and emptiness,
are attained.
Moreover, it is said that withdrawal and absorption together constitute the limb of the attainment of the
basis; breath-control and restraint together the limb of the attainment of vital energy; while recollection
constitutes the limb of the attainment of reality.
Concerning them, Kalacakrapada says in the Aural Lineage (Shyan-brgyud):
All should be known in terms of sixes ...
Considering that to be the significance of his intention, previous masters have explained there to be six
divisions of subject matter in each case: the significance of the name of each (of the six main topics,
withdrawal, etc.); the temporal boundaries of meditation; the limb of meditative method; the signs and
measures of meditation; the divisions of purificand and purifier, and the result obtained through meditation.
Those are further subsumed in the three virtues: withdrawal and absorption together are virtue in the
beginning; breath-control and restraint together are virtue in the middle; and recollection and concentration
together are virtue in the end. Vajragarbha has declared them to form such a path.
In general, it may be said that the Teacher's entire teaching is virtue in the beginning, middle and end.
Nonetheless, with reference to this, the culmination of definitive significance, those others [among his
teachings are not superlative virtue, for they grasp conceptual meditation and the bliss of the action seal to
be the absolute, and even their meditation on nonconceptual emptiness at the limit of investigation has the
characteristic of being a cause of relative samsāra. They are not the absolute mandala, and great bliss, and
emptiness. In this path, however, because one at first attains the image of emptiness in the mandala of the
absolute, there is virtue in the beginning. Because, in the middle, the vital energies of action that are the
cause of conceptions are brought to cessation, there is virtue in the middle. And, in the end, one attains the
changelessness of the absolute seminal point. Owing to these three, and because there is the appearance of
genuine pristine cognition in which non-conceptualization involving the abandonment of investigation
[emerges) in the beginning, middle and end, this is virtue. For the significance of virtue is recognized to be
happiness along with its causes.
Moreover, because it is virtuous in the beginning, one attains an uncommon concentration involving
tranquility and insight. Because it is virtuous in the middle, at first vital energy and mind are intermingled
and later the gates of the centers are opened. And because it is virtuous in the end, it brings about the
achievement of the changeless body of pristine cognition.
Having applied oneself to yoga on the basis of those six limbs, initially there is a partial descent of the
pristine cognition of indestructible reality. Gradually, having obtained the full blessing of the descent of
indestructible reality, apparent signs arise with respect to visible experience. The mind abides in non-
conceptualization automatically. Bodily experience occurs with spontaneous movement, and vocalic
experience with various utterances. In these and other ways one guards the mastery of whatever happens,
and so gradually undoes the knots of the three doors. In the end, the seminal fluids, points and energies of
the six centers are purified, and one comes to achieve the body of the pristine cognition of the six families
of conquerors.
8. Rdo-rje gsum-gyi bsnyen-sgrub, "the Service and Attainment of the Three
Indestructible Realities"
It says in the Guhyasamāja:
Create your body to be like mind, mind like body, and mind like verbal articulation.
Thus, this is a distinctive instruction, according to which, in the phase of the ground, having established the
relationship in which the three indestructible realities (vajra) are indivisible, one cultivates, during the phase
of the path, the yoga of the indivisible indestructible reality, whereupon, in the phase of the result, the three
secrets of indestructible reality are disclosed. It says in the Stanzas of Indestructible Reality (Vajrapäda):



Tibetan Technologies of the Self, Part II
125
Purifying the channels, the taints of body are cleansed.
Purifying the winds, the taints of speech are cleansed.
Attaining incorruptibility, mind's propensities are overcome.
The centers' knots are undone
by the pulses of the four delights.
The sleep of ignorance is clarified
by recovering from unconsciousness.
In the decline of dispassion the mind exhausts hate.
Through passion pure, one is liberated in great bliss.
The significance of this is as follows: that which purifies the bodily channels is the limb of service, which
pertains to the indestructible reality of body. With respect to this, the yoga for which body is the essential
point is definitively established through the three categories of the causal phase, namely, withdrawal, its
function, and its result, which is absorption.
That which purifies speech and vital energy is the limb of attainment, which pertains to the
indestructible reality of speech. Having proceeded with the recitations of indestructible reality (vajrajapa),
[the yoga for which speech is the essential point) is definitively established through four [categories.]
namely, breath-control, its result, which is restraint, the function of those two, and the result that is
thereby attained.
but That which purifies mind, the seminal point, is the limb of great attainment, which pertains to the
indestructible reality of mind. The mundane path is completely taught as recollection, including these three:
for those of highest acumen, the inner heat; for those of middling acumen, (the yoga of] one's own body:
and for those of least acumen, the reliance on another's body. The complete teaching of the supramundane
path consists of the concentrations involving great bliss, [known] representationally and
nonrepresentationally, whereupon, by abiding one-pointedly in that non-duality that is self-presenting bliss,
all the essential seminal points that are outwardly projected are bound up without corruption. Thus, having
experientially cultivated the yoga of the three indestructible realities in the appropriate manner, the fruit of
the triple purification of the three obscurations is the attainment in a single lifetime, in a single body, of
the three resultant bodies.
Having thus condensed the path traditions of the lineages of attainment into the eight descents of transmitted
precepts, I have referred to the foremost among the path traditions of the conveyances in Tibet, and to those
in which the body of the path is most complete. Because the minor traditions are exceedingly many, their
origins and the definitive ordering of their instructions, etc., cannot all be related here."
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used to refer to works that are frequently mentioned:
BA George Roerich, trans., The Blue Annals. 2nd ed. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1976,
DNgDz Gdams nag mdzod: A Treasury of Instructions and Techniques for Spiritual Realization, compiled by
'Jam-mgon Kon-sprul Blo-gros-mtha'-yas. 12 vols. Delhi: N. Lungtok and N. Gyaltsan, 1971.
NSTB Dudjom Rinpoche, Jikdrel Yeshe Dorje, The Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism. Its
Fundamentals and History. Annotated translation by Gyurme Dorje and Matthew Kapstein. 2 vols.
London: Wisdom Publications, 1991.
ShK Kong-sprul Yon-tan-rgya-mtsho (=Blo-gros-mtha'-yas), Shes-bya kun-khyab.. 3 vols. Beijing: Mi-
rigs-dpe-skrun-khang, 1982.



126
3
Mathew T. Kapstein
Notes
1. E. Gene Smith, "Introduction" to Kongtrul's Encyclopaedia of Indo-Tibetan Culture. Satapitaka Series 80. New
Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture, 1970.
2. Consider, for example, Geoffrey Samuel, Civilized Shamans: Buddhism in Tibetan Societies. Washington/London:
Smithsonian Institution Press, 1993.
3. These are: (1) Bka'-brgyud sngags-mdzod, 8 vols. Paro: Dilgo Khyentsey Rinpoche, 1982. An earlier edition of the
same collection, was published by the Gsung rab nyams gso rgyun 'phel par khang in 6 vols., 1974. (2) Rgya-chen
bka'-mdzod 'Jam-mgon Kong-sprul Blo-gros mtha'-yas. 20 vols. Paro: Ngodup, 1975. The last four volumes (17.
20) constitute (3) the Shes-bya kun-khyab mdzod, which, however, does not properly belong here. (3) Shk. (4)
DNgDz. (5) Rin chen gter mdzod chen mo. Paro: Ngodrup and Sherap Drimay, 1976.
For considerable information on Kong-sprul's writing, the reader is referred to Dieter Schuh, Tibetische
Handschriften und Blockdrucke: Gesammelte Werken des Koi-sprul Blo-gros mtha-yas. Verzeichnis der
Orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland, XI, VI. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1976.
4. "Dams-ngag: Tibetan Technologies of the Self," in Roger Jackson and José Cabezón, eds., Tibetan Literature:
Studies in Genre (Ithaca: Snow Lion Publications, 1995).
5. The introductory passage that follows is drawn from DNgDz, vol. 12, pp. 645-646. The summaries of the eight
conveyances that follow are given on pp. 662-83.
6. This refers to the Mani Bka'-'bum traditions associated with king Srong-btsan-sgam-po, on which see, M. Kapstein,
The Tibetan Assimilation of Buddhism (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), ch. 8.
7. Srong-btsan sgam-po, the emanation of Avalokitesvara; Khri Srong-Ide'u-btsan, the emanation of Manjusri; and
Khri Ral-pa-can, the emanation of Vajrapāni.
8. The vehicles of (1) śrävakas, (2) pratyekabuddhas, (3) bodhisattvas, which are the three "causal vehicles" (rgyul
theg-pa); (4) kriyatantra, (5) caryātantra, (6) yogatantra, which are the three outer vehicles among the "fruitional
vehicles" of mantra ('bras-bu'l theg-pa sngags phyi-pa): (7) mahāyoga, (8) anuyoga, and (9) atiyoga, which are
the inner mantras (sngags nang-pa). Atiyoga is also called Rdzogs-chen, the Great Perfection. For detailed
discussions of the nine vehicle system of the Rnying-ma tradition, see Dudjom Rinpoche, Jikdrel Yeshe Dorje. The
Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism: Its Fundamentals and History. Trans. Gyurme Dorje and Matthew Kapstein.
Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1991, vol. 1, book 1, parts 3 and 4. The survey of the Great Perfection that is given
there, pp. 294-345, will clarify the many terse allusions found in the present synopsis.
9. As in other Mahāyāna traditions, these are the Body of Reality (dharmakaya), Body of Perfect Rapture
(sambhogakāya), and Body of Emanation (nirmūnakāya). For their special interpretation within Rnying-ma-pa
doctrine, see Dudjom Rinpoche, The Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism, vol. 1, book 1. part 2
10. The "six vehicles of definitive attainment" are the bodhisattvayāna and the first five of the mantra vehicles.
11. The consciousnesses associated with the five physical senses, plus mental consciousness (manovijñrūna) afflicted
mental activity (klistamanah), and the ground consciousness (alayavijirāna).
12. Primordial liberation (ye-grol), natural liberation (rang-grol), direct liberation (gcer-grol), and unlimited liberation
(mtha'-grol). Cf. Shk, vol. 3. p. 292.
13. The last, degenerate period during which the dharma is still taught, and during which human beings are subject to
the five defilements (pañrcakaṣāya), or dregs (snyings-ma), of short lifespan, wrong views, afflictions, the general
degeneration of sentient beings, and bad times.
14. Among the three baskets (tripitaka), the Vinayapitaka corresponds to the higher training in behavior (adhhisila), the
Sūtrapitaka to the higher training in meditation (adhicitta), and the Abhidharmapitaka to the higher training in
discernment (adhiprajñrā).
15. The mandala of the Sixteen Seminal Points, as depicted in a painting of about 1900, is reproduced in Gerd-
Wolfgang Essen and Tsering Tashi Thingo, Die Götter des Himalaya: Buddhistische Kunst Tibets, die Sammlung
Gerd-Wolfgang Essen (Munich: Prestel) vol. 1, pp. 182-3
16. For the text of this work, see Helmut Eimer, Bodhipathapradipa, Asiatische Forschungen 59 (Wiesbaden: Otto
Harrassowitz, 1979); and for an English translation, Atisa, A Lamp for the Path and Commentary, trans. Richard
Sherburne, S. J. (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1983).
17. Bodhipathapradipa, verse 2ab.
18. Ratnávali. ch.1, verse 3. The higher stations (abhyudaya) are the fortunate stations of birth in samsāra, which are
still far from the definitive attainment (naihśreyasa) of liberation, nirvana.



Tibetan Technologies of the Self, Part II
127
19. The Discus of Weapons (Mtshon-cha'i 'khor-lo) and Poison-conquering Peacock (Rma-bya dug-'joms) by
Dharmaraksita; the Vajra-song Conquering the Apprehension of Self (Bdag-'dzin joms-pardo-rje'i glu) by
Mitrayogin; and Pounding Down Conceptions (Rtog-pa 'bur.joms) and Eighteen Doctrines Curried onto the Path
(Lam-khyer-gyi chos bco-brgyad) of Suvarnadvipa.
20. It should be clear from passages such as this that the relative" cultivation (kun-rdzoh sems-bskved) is not
superseded by the absolute" cultivation of bodhicitta (don-dam sems-bskyed). The designations relative" and
"absolute" refer, rather, to their respective orientations to appearance and emptiness, which here, as always in the
Madhyamaka traditions, are thought to be inseparably coordinated.
21. Shk, vol. 3, p. 308, lists these as scriptural authority (lung), historical precedent (lo-rgyus), esoteric precepts (man-
ngag), and spiritual experience (nyams-nyong). "Epistemic authority" (tshad-ma) therefore is used here in a rather
different sense from that familiar from the pramăna traditions. Nevertheless, it is still clearly related to the concept
of authoritative sources of knowledge, but here within the specific context of a tradition of practice.
22. The text here erroneously reads gsum three."
23. ShK, vol. 3, p. 310. These are: the unsubsiding river of empowerment; the undeclining lineage of blessing; the
irreversible stream of instruction; and the fulfillment of aspirations through devotion.
24. I.e. Sa-chen Kun-dga' snying-po (1092-1158).
25. Shk, vol. 3, pp. 318-21. The "four views" (Ita-ba bzhi) are those corresponding to the sequence of the four
empowerments; the three essences (ngo-bo-nyid gsum) refer to appearance, emptiness and their coalescence; and
the four limits of achievement (grub-mtha' bzhi) are the culminating results attained through the sequences of
meditation appropriate to each of the four empowerments. The five bodies are the four referred to in n. 30, with the
addition of the Body of Great Bliss (mahasukhakaya).
26. ShK, vol. 3, pp. 310-11. The five causal coincidences demarcate the boundaries of the five paths of accumulation,
application, seeing, meditation and no-more-learning.
27. The three occasions for the gathering of the elements (khams-'du lugs bzhi) pertain to those who are
temperamentally inclined to the practice (las-'phro-can), those who are devoted (mos-gus-can) and those who are
energetic (brtson-'grus-can). These and the seven beneficial precepts are detailed in ShK, vol. 3, pp. 312-6.
28. Refer to Shk, vol. 3, p. 621, for surveys of these.
29. The text here erroneously reads gzhi instead of lus. Cf. ShK, vol. 3, pp. 322-3.
30. The ten signs (rtags bou) are ten types of experience whose occurrence associated with the mastery of the yoga of
luminosity; the eight attributes (yon-tan brgyad) result from the purification of the elements by means of the yogas
of the channels and vital energies (ShK, vol. 3, pp. 345 and 658); and the four enlightened activities (phrin-las bzhi)
are those developing from ritual activity: peaceful (zhi-ba), enriching (rgyas-pa), coercive (dbang), and wrathful
(drag-po). Of the supreme accomplishments (mchog-gi dngos-grub), the seven limbs (yan-lag bdun, Shk, vol. 3,
p. 658), that pertain to the sambhogakuya, are: (1) possession of the major and minor marks of the Buddha: (2) the
consort's embrace; (3) great bliss; (4) insubstantiality; (5) perpetual compassion for all beings; (6)
cessationlessness; and (7) unimpededness. The eight lordships (dhang-phyug brgyad, ShK, vol. 3. pp. 639 and 660)
are the heightened achievement of the common accomplishments of bodily subtleness, lightness, greatness,
ubiquity, clairvoyance, firm power over those qualities, overcoming all beings, and ability to adive as one will. The
four bodies are the three common to Mahāyāna teaching in general, with the addition of the Body of Essential
Nature (svābhāvikakāya), and the five pristine cognitions (Ye-shes Inga) are the paircajīrāna mentioned throughout
Mahāyāna and Vajrayāna literature.
31. Because much has been written about the Six Doctrines of Nāropa elsewhere, there is no need to add extensively to
Kong-sprul's terse remarks here. See especially: Herbert V. Guenther, The Life and Teaching of Nāropa (Oxford: at
the Clarendon Press, 1963); Chang Chen Chi, Esoteric Teachings of the Tibetan Tantra (York Beach, Maine: Samuel
Weiser, 1982). The six basic doctrines - inner heat (gtum-mo), apparitional body (sgyu-lus), dream (rmi-lam),
luminosity ('od-gsal), the intermediate state (between death and rebirth, har-do), and transference (of consciousness
at death, 'pho-ba) - are in any case common with the six doctrines of the Shangs-pa tradition, discussed below. Action
seal (las-rgya, karmamudrū) is the discipline whereby great bliss (bde-ba chen-po, mahasukha) is achieved by yoga
practiced in union with a suitable consort. The penetration of the city" (grong 'ing) appears to be a lost teaching, but
is reported to have involved the ability to appropriate other bodies to one's own consciousness is shown to be
continuous despite bodily discontinuity. Cf. ShK, vol. 3. p. 370.
32. These alternative classifications are more fully explained in Shk, vol. 3, pp. 325-8.
33. The text erroneously reads "seven distinctions, but should be emended following ShK, vol 3. p. 381, where the
three distinctions are explained to be: the essence that is transcendental perfection (ngo-bo pha-rol-tu phyin-pa);



128
Mathew T. Kapstein
accordance with mantra (sngags dang rjes-su mthun-pa); and the name "Mahamudrā" (ming phyag-rgya chen-po).
On Maitripa, see Mark Tatz, "The Life of the Siddha-Philosopher Maitrigupta," Journal of the American Oriental
Society 107/4(1987): pp. 695-711.
34. These, of course, are not to be confused with the six doctrines - inner heat, etc. - already discussed above.
35. The preliminary practices, as redacted within the Karma Bka'-brgyud tradition, are given a detailed exposition in
Jamgön Kongtrül, The Torch of Certainty, trans. Judith Hanson (Boulder/London: Shambhala, 1977).
36. These are detailed in ShK, vol. 3, pp. 383-4.
37. Until seven generations of teachers had passed, beginning with Khyung-po's "grand-teacher," the Buddha
Vajradhara, his teaching was sealed so that it could only be transmitted in full to a single chosen disciple. This
"seal" was appropriately broken by the seventh successor, Sangs-rgyas Ston-pa (1219-1290).
38. Mahamudra in Sanskrit, so-called because, as a seal closes a letter or completes a document, this teaching
blishes the limit of all phenomena in the nature of the enlightened mind.
39. In the highest teachings of the tantras, the empowerment required to qualify the disciple is divided into four major
stages, corresponding to the stages of the practice of yoga.
40. The four mundane states are waking consciousness, dreamless sleep, dream and absorption in trance.
41. The three in this case are the time of death itself, the period immediately after death, when one enters into trance-
like oblivion; and the period following that, when disembodied consciousness grows active once more, and is
subject to intensive hallucinations as it searches for its next place of birth.
42. ShK, vol. 3, p. 400: "The four faults are these: (i) though your mind is neither united with, nor separate from, the
Body of Reality, you don't recognize it, because it's too close; (ii) though the realization of it] may occur to you,
you don't comprehend it, because it's too profound; (iii) though it suffices just to recall it, you can't believe it,
because it's too easy; and (iv) though the Three Bodies might arise within you, you can't accept it, because it's
too good."
43. Myur-mdzad ye-shes-kyi mgon-po, also known as the Six-armed Mahākāla" (nag-po chen-po phyag-drug-pa), a
protective deity whose cult spread from the Shangs-pa into most of the schools of Tibetan Buddhism, especially the
Jo-nang-pa and the Dge-lugs-pa.
44. The vows of the prātimoksa, of the bodhisattva, and of the mantras.
45. The three essential points (gnad gsum), which concern body, breathing and mind, and the ten bonds (chings beu)
are detailed in ShK, vol. 3, pp. 412-3.
46. Dam-pa Kun-dga' of Ding-ri (1062-1124). For his hagiography, see BA, pp. 920-23.
47. On the four seals (phyag-rgya bzhi) in general, see David L. Snellgrove, Indo-Tibetan Buddhism: Indian Buddhists
and Their Tibetan Successors (Boston: Shambhala, 1987), pp. 265-9.
48. Perhaps to be identified with the four dhyāna (Pali, jhāna) of normative Buddhist doctrine, as given in
e. g.. Dighanikäya, II. 186, III. 222 (PTS edition).
49. In Tibetan spyod, "conduct," and gcod, "cutting." are homonyms, both pronounced approximately cho.
50. gnyan-khrod. Sites for the disposal of corpses and other locations associated with hostile spirits.
51. These terms refer to specific visualizations practiced by adepts of the Object of Cutting,
52. Also mentioned in Shk, vol. 3, pp. 427-8, but not precisely enumerated, except for the "confidence with respect to
the view" (Ita-ba'i gding). As the same passage speaks also of "view and conduct" (lta-spyod), we may surmise that
the three are view, meditation and conduct.
53. The technical terms found here are explained in detail in ShK, vol. 3, pp. 432-453: withdrawal (sor-sdud) refers to
the withdrawal of consciousness from outer objects; absorption (bsam-gtan) is the achievement of the mastery of
luminosity: breath-control (srog-rtsol) involves the purification of the energy channels, and the concentration of
vital energy in the central channel: restraint ('dzin-pa) is the concentration of the vital energies in the indestructible
seminal point (mi-shigs-pa'i thig-le): remembrance (rjes-dran) involves the realization of bliss and emptiness
through the mastery of the three seals: action seal (las-rgya), seal of pristine cognition (ye-rgya) and great seal
(phvag-rgya chen-mo, which here is the image of emptiness," stong-gzugs); and concentration (ting-'dzin)
involves the coalescence of the image of emptiness" and unchanging bliss.
54. The four limbs of the deity's service (sevā), further (upasevā), attainment (sadhana) and great attainment
(mahasādhana) are best known in connection with the stage of creation. Here, they have been adapted to describe
primarily the stage of perfection.
55.los-med bzhi. Refer to Shk, vol. 3. pp. 431-2. One engaged in the service of the deity becomes from mundane
entanglement, avoiding reference to the enjoyments of body, speech, mind and sexual pleasure.
56. ShK, vol. 3. p. 445, specifies that these are the karmantudra, jaränamudra, and mahāmudrā.



Tibetan Technologies of the Self, Part II
129
57. The three indestructible realities are body, speech and mind; and, similarly, the three secrets are the body, speech
and mind of a buddha.
58. The obscurations of afflictions, ignorance, and absorption in trance.
59. ShK, vol. 3. pp. 461-464, on the minor traditions, discusses primarily the teaching of Santigupta as redacted by
Tāranātha. DNgDz. vol. 12, includes these and others, including representative teachings of the major
Avalokitesvara traditions,



A MOST PLEASING SYMPHONY
AN UNKNOWN BIOGRAPHY OF THE FIFTH DALAI LAMA
O
p
Samten G. Karmaya
MENTI
It is rare in Tibetan literature to have both an "autobiography" (rang rnam) and a "biography" (rnam thar)
written by someone other than the author of the autobiography. This is the case of the Dukula, the
autobiography of the Fifth Dalai Lama (hereafter DL), Ngag-dbang blo-bzang rgya-mtsho (1617-1682), and
his biography written by sMon-'gro-pa 'Jam-dbyangs dbang-rgyal rdo-rje.
As I have taken up the study of the Dukula, Gene Smith very kindly thought, as always, that it would
be useful to me if he sent me a copy of a manuscript of the biography which he recently came upon.
Although this work of sMon-'gro-pa was known to exist it has never been published and so had remained
inaccessible. I shall call this work simply the biography". It only reaches up to the year 1646 when DL was
thirty. I do not intend to study the whole of it in this article. There is only a limited amount of strictly
biographical material compared with the Dukula. Two thirds of the work are in fact filled with quotations
from Sutras, Tantras and other Buddhist classical works. These quotations are meant to demonstrate the
concordance of Bodhisattva activity as revealed in Buddhist scriptures, but from a historical point of view,
they remain largely irrelevant to the subject. Added to this is its flowery language embellished with poems
of the shastra type of writing. Nevertheless, it not only sheds light on some obscure passages in the Dukula,
but there are also a number of points on which it differs from what DL states in the Dukula. It is upon some
of these aspects that I would like to dwell in the following pages.
The author of the biography
Almost nothing is known about sMon-'gro-pa 'Jam-dbyangs dbang-rgyal rdo-rje. Yet he was certainly a
remarkably learned man of the seventeenth century. He was the son of the scholar sMon-'gro-pa Rig-gnas
rgya-mtsho'i 'phreng-ba 'dzin-pa alias Tshe-dbang don- grub who was a cousin of the Jo-nang-pa master
Kun-dga' grol-mchog and an official at the court of bSam-'grub-rtse. He was involved in his family's
contest over the authority of the Jo-nang-pa monastic establishments not long after the recognition of
Taranatha (1575-1635) as the reincarnation of Kun-dga' grol-mchog at Chos-lung byang-rtse.
sMon-'gro is a place in the La-stod region in gTsang. DL reports that Tshe-dbang don- grub came to meet
him in Shigatse in 1642 when DL was received there in state by the victorious Gushri Khan (1582-1654).
DL states he was overwhelmed by the learned man and wished to study under him, but given the
political circumstances at the time it was not possible for him to remain in Shigatse." In 1643 an invitation
was sent asking him to come and give tutorial assistance to the young DL, but the scholar replied that he
would send his son sMon-'gro-pa 'Jam-dbyangs dbang-rgyal rdo-rje instead. The reason for not coming
himself is not given. It was probably his age. Nevertheless, in 1644 Jam-dbyangs dbang-rgyal arrived in
Lhasa. DL states that he made a thorough revision with him of the Sanskrit grammar based on the Kalapa
and Candrapa which he had studied earlier. DL also learned from him the dkar rtsis astronomy,
Kavyadarsha, as well as asking the master about difficult points in the Bodhisattvavadana-kalpalata.
1. For an account of DL's visionary experiences, one may see Samten G Karmay, Secret Visions of the Fifth Dalai
Lama, Gold Manuscript of the Fournier Collection. London: Serindia 1988 (Reprint 1998).
2. KGZ f. 67a: sde ba smon 'gro ba mkhas pa ishe dbang don 'grub.
3. MLh pp. 149, 151, 403.
4. Dukula, Vol. I, p. 216.
5. Dukula, Vol. I, p. 216.
6. Dukula, Vol. I, pp. 244, 258.
7. The Tibetan Tripitaka, Tokyo: Suzuki Research Foundation (Reproduction of the Peking edition), 1964-1966, Vol.
288, No. 5655



A Most Pleasing Symphony
131
'Jam-dbyangs dbang-rgyal was therefore someone who personally knew DL. In the colophon of the
biography he describes himself as rig byed pa, i.e. one who is versed in Vedas (rig byed). Indeed his style
of writing certainly confirms this. The colophon further indicates that it was dKon-mchog chos-'phel
(d. 1646), the thirty-fifth throne-holder of dGa'-Idan monastery at the time, often known as Gling-smad
zhabs-drung in the Dukula, who requested him to write the biography, Kon-mchog chos-'phel was
supported in his request by the young Sangs-rgyas rgya-mtsho (1653-1705) who was known as Zhal-ngo
Grong-smad, "Leader from Grong-smad", during this period.
Although Kon-mchog chos-'phel was one of the architects of the dGe-lugs-pa's ascendancy during the
seventeenth century, he remains an obscure figure. According to the biography, a rnam thar of dKon-mchog
chos-phel entitled mKhas pa'i rna rgyan was written by rDzing-phyi mkhan-po (p. 118a). Kon-mchog
chos-'phel was also the chief lama of the small monastic establishment known as gSang-sngags-mkhar
which was a Ge-lugs-pa centre situated on the way to da-Idan monastery, but during the conflict between
the Karma bka'-brgyud in g Tsang and the dGe-lugs in dBus, the former had seized it. Later, Kon-mchog
chos-phel managed to retrieve it for the dGe-lugs-pa cause. He was involved from the beginning in
selecting the sprul sku candidates of the Fourth Dalai Lama and later became the chief tutor of DL. It was
his idea to build the Potala Palace on what was known as the Red Hill (dMar-po-ri, also written Mel-po-
ri). It is interesting to note that in 1644 he, amongst other people, also urged DL to write the Dukula giving
him a copy of the biography of Po-dong 'Jigs-bral phyogs-las ram-rgyal (1376-1451) by 'Jigs-med-"bangs,
a disciple of Po-dong. dkon-mchog chos-'phel advised DL to use the biography of Po-dong as a model
since it was a well written work. However, DL, who aged only twenty-seven then, was not convinced of the
need to write an autobiography and politely declined saying that he was too busy at the time writing a work
on the Phar phyin literature. Nevertheless, in 1667 DL aged fifty came back to the question, and began to
think that he, after all, might as well write an autobiography, but he ignored the suggestion of taking Bo-
dong's biography as a model for the account of his own life. He considered Bo-dong's biography to be too
full of praises to the lama.
DL further remarks that "some biographies were written in too poetic a language and others were too
full of ordinary vocabulary like the old herdsman's local dialect. It is rare to have one which is honest
looking and straight forward in the meaning." When DL made these remarks he might well have had in
mind of the genre of his own biography by Mon-'gro-pa as we shall see.
The first section of the biography
'Jam-dbyangs dbang-rgyal completed the biography in 1646 at an unspecified place situated in the district
of gZhad, g Tsang. It is entitled Gyal dbang thams cad mkhyen pa'i rtogs brjod mthong ba ldan mchog fu
dga' ba'i sgra dbyangs sarga gsum pa, "The life-story of the Conqueror, All Knowing, meaningful to the
beholder and a most pleasing symphony that has three cantos". The biography was presented to DL who
records it in the section of the year fire-dog (1647) of the Dukula simply stating, "I responded to sMon-'gro
pan-chen 'Jam-dbang dbang-rgyal rdo-rje who wrote me a letter and sent the volume of the life-story of me
which he composed at the order of Gling-smad zhabs-drung"." DL made no comment either on the style of
the language or contents of the biography, but he does mention it among the works which served as the
sources for his Dukula which he began to write in 1667.12
As the title shows, the biography is divided into three contrasting sections. The author uses the Sanskrit
term sarga, "section", "canto", the use of which was à la mode in the seventeenth century. In the first section
8. This is published under the title: Bo dong pan chen gyi mnam thar (dPal Idan bla ma dam pa thams cad mkhyen pa
phyogs thams cad las mam par rgyal ba'i zhabs kyi mnam par thar pa ngo mtshar gyi dga' ston), Gangs can rig
Là mdzod, 15, Lhasa, Bod jongs bod yig dpe raying ope skran khang, 1991,
9. Dukula, Vol. I, p. 13.
10. Dukula, Vol. I. p. 17.
11. Dukula, Vol. I. p. 279.
12. Dukula, Vol. I. pp. 14-15.



132
Samten G Karmay
(1a-8b2), which is in the form of an introduction, the author takes up the topic of Buddhist doctrine of
reincarnation (sprul sku) in general and then devotes himself to the discussion of the life-series of Lokeshvara.
The second section of the biography
The second section (8b-20a6) is devoted to brief accounts of the series of the Dalai Lamas. It starts from
Gyal-ba dGe-dun-grub (1391-1475) and ends after giving a brief account of the Fourth Dalai Lama (1589-
1616). The author asserts that "it was Lokeshvara who came in a series of Dalai Lamas in the way a snake
changes its skin". 13 The coming of the series of the Dalai Lamas is supported in his opinion by various
prophecies. In this connection the author cites a prophetical tradition whose origin he does not specify. The
prophecy is based on a description of a juniper tree in Rwa-sgreng that had, it is stated, seven layers of bark
(shun pa rim pa bdun, 19a) believed to indicate that there would be seven "spiritual guides" (ram 'dren
bdun), that is to say seven Dalai Lamas. He goes on to say that Ngag-dbang blo-bzang rgya-mtsho, the Fifth
Dalai Lama, was the fifth of the seven.14 The prophecy is not mentioned in the Dukula. However, the author
of the biography was not the first who brought out this idea. It is echoed in a song composed by the Second
Dalai Lama. I have not been able to locate the song. It is, however, quoted in the biographies of the Sixth
and Seventh Dalai Lamas. According to sDe-srid Sangs-rgyas rgya-mtsho, DL himself also received a
similar prophecy and that this is found in the Yang gsang rgya can.16 The work to which the sDe-srid refers
to is in all probability the gSang ba'i rnam thar rgya can, but I have not been able to trace the prophecy
in it.
In the biography of the Seventh Dalai Lama, Cang-skya' Rol-pa'i rdo-rje, who completed it in 1758,
takes up the topic again stating that the seventh Dalai Lama was the one indicated as the seventh guide by
the prophecy, but he carefully avoids saying that there would be no one after the Seventh Dalai Lama.IN
The Prophecy
The prophecy is found in what is known as bka' gdams bu chos.' It is in the section devoted to the life-
series of a prince called dKon-mchog-'bangs. The prince is presented as a previous birth of 'Brom-ston
Gyal-ba'i 'byung-gnas (1008-1064), the chief disciple of Atisha in Tibet. 'Brom founded Rwa-sgreng
monastery in 1056. In the prophecy, it is said that in Rwa-sgreng there would be 21,000 juniper trees all
connected through their roots to two trunks of juniper trees, symbolizing Atisha and 'Brom. Amongst other
characteristics, these trunks have seven layers of bark suggesting that there would be seven guides in Tibet.
The junipers of Rwa-sgreng, Rwa-sgreng shug-pa as they are known, are to this day considered as sacred.
Their twigs or even the pounded powder of their branches are sold in the markets in Lhasa although few
seem to know why the junipers from Rwa-sgreng are so sacred.
In general the junipers from the ancient times were considered as sacred in the Bonpo rituals, being the
eternal symbol of the Bon religion, and believed to have the effect of purification and so used in the
purificatory rituals. The bka' gdams bu chos uses the same term lha shing, "tree of the gods", to describe
the tree as in the Bonpo literature.20
13. shun Ipags rjes (brjes) kyang sbrul ma rjes (brjes) pa'i shul du byon pa ... (f. 15b).
14. F. 20b.
15. RSNy p. 47; dPag bsam rin po che i snye ma, Vol. I, pp. 12-13.
16. BS p. 376: 'gro don skyong ba'i skye ba ni/bdun 'byung khyed nyid Inga pa stel
17. A Record of the Visionary Experiences of the Fifth Dalai Lama Ngag-dbang blo-bzang rgya-mtsho, Smartis
Shesrig Spendzod, Vol. 42. Leh 1972.
18. PNy Vol. I, pp. 12-13.
19. 'Brom ston rgyal ba'i 'byung gnas kyi skyes rabs bka gdams bu chos, Ziling: m Tsho sngon mi rigs dpe skrun khang
1993. pp. 193-96.
20. Cf. Samten G.Karmay, "The Local Deities and the Juniper Tree: a Ritual for Purification (bsang)", in The Arrow
and the Spindle, Studies in History, Myths, Rituals and Beliefs in Tibet. Kathmandu: Mandala Book Point 1998. No.
21 (pp. 413-22).



A Most Pleasing Symphony
133
The third section of the biography
This section is the longest (2001-12825). It deals with the life of DL, but compared to the Dukula its
treatment of the subject is surprisingly superficial. It is not because the author did not have much information
of DL's life at the time, but presumably it was too sensitive to go into any detail given the political clout that
DL had acquired just at the time when the author was requested or rather "ordered", in DL's own word, to
write it.
At the beginning of the section, the author still continues with the theme of various prophecies quoting
a certain number of tantric works that do not seem to bear any real relevance to the subject. The family
Zahor, in which DL was born, and its lineage are related to the story of Pehar. Here the author refers the
reader to an unknown historical work, a rgyal rab (rabs) written by 'Phyong-rgyas pan-chen. The author
neither gives the full title of the work nor has identified 'Phyong-rgyas paņ-chen (27a6).
He goes on to state that the birth of DL was prophesied by the religious protector of bSam-yas
monastery, that is Pehar. He also mentions that Taranatha (1575-1635)21 had encouraged DL's mother to
consent to her marriage into the Zahor family foretelling that a prince would be born, and later when in 1617
she gave birth to a child, he was asked to give him a name. In the same year the rNying-ma-pa master Rig-
'dzin Ngag-gi dbang-po (1580-1639), who was a distant cousin of the family, performed a certain number
of rituals for the benefit of the child (3262).
Due to the political and military conflict at the time, the mother and child had to flee their fort and
eventually had to return to her own home at sNa-dkar-rtse. These events are dealt with in a rather cryptic
manner without ever mentioning what happened to the father of the child who was in fact arrested and
imprisoned at the bSam-'grub-rtse court where he later died in 1626. He states that the child, when he was
five at sNa-dkar-rtse, left a wonderful footprint on a rock, but later partisan people said that it was the
footprint of O-rgyan mtsho-mo (35b2). However, neither the author of the biography nor DL reveal the
identity of O-rgyan mtsho-mo. She was the 6th rDo-rje phag-mo of Sam-sdings.22
Another event which emerges more clearly in this biography than in the Dukula involves the relation
between Taranatha and DL. When the officials of Drepung went to ask the king in g Tsang for permission to
recognize the child of the Zahor family as the sprul sku of the Fourth Dalai Lama and the king agreed,
Taranatha is supposed to have made the following remark in the presence of the king and his ministers: "The
outbreak of fire cannot be extinguished by fire, the spurt of water cannot be stopped by water. Little is done
in order to prevent the coming of this prince of 'Phyong-rgyas".23 It is to be recalled that Taranatha, the great
historian, had entertained hope when he encouraged the mother of the child to consent to her marriage, to
the effect that a prince would be born to her, and when the boy was born he was asked to give a name which
was Mi-'gyur kun-dga', a name that has the echo of the Jo-nang-pa, the Buddhist order to which he
belonged. When the child was formally recognized as the sprul sku of the Fourth Dalai Lama, he must have
been alarmed and disappointed at the way in which he allegedly made such a statement. In the opinion of
the author of the biography, if the king consented to the request, it was because of the pressure from the
Mongols and not because he really wished to make it up with dGe-lugs-pa.
21. The date of the death of the historian is given by Ngag-dbang blo-gros grags-pa (1920-1975) in his dPal Idan jo
nang pa'i chos 'yung rgyal ba'i chos ishul gsal byed zla ha'i sgron me (Jo nang chos 'yung zla ba'i sgron me,
Krung ko'i bod kyi shes rig dpe skrun khang, 1992, p. 59), but the author does not indicate on what sources the date
is based.
22. Her full name is O-rgyan mkha-spyod ye-shes mtsho-mo. According to Tashi Tsering (bsam sding rdo rje phag mo
sku phreng rim byon gyi mtshan dang 'khrungs gshegs kyi lo khams star chags su 'god thabs sngon 'gro'i zhib 'jug
mdor bsdus, in gYu masho, Bod kvi bud med pa'i dus deb, Dharamsala, No. 1, 1993, 39) she was born in 1543.
Lobzang Gyamtsho saw her in 1620 (Dukula, Vol. I. p. 50), hence when she was 77. if the above date of her birth
is correct.
23. me 'bur mes mi non chu 'bur chus mi non zer ba yin pas/phyong rgyas kyi royal bu di 'byon pa la bkag cha byas
than dra (36a5). Cf. also Dukula, Vol. I, p. 54. This passage does not seem to be found in MLh.



134
Samten G Karmay
Concerning the test whether the child was the genuine sprul sku or not, the author is categorical in
stating that:
When bKa'-chen and others arranged in public a certain number of articles, such as samta, vajra,
bell and porcelain bowls which belonged to the previous Dalai Lama mixing them with identical
ones belonging to other persons in front of the child, he unhesitatingly picked up all the things
correctly and everybody looking on was amazed. 24
Now let us see what DL himself has to say about this test:
The official Tsha-ba bka'-bcu of dGa'-Idan Palace showed me statues and rosaries (that belonged
to the Fourth Dalai Lama and other people), but I was unable to distinguish between them! When
he left the room I heard him tell the people outside that I had successfully passed the tests. Later,
when he became my tutor, he would often admonish me and say: "You must work hard, since you
were unable to recognize the objects!"25
After arriving in Drepung in 1622 at the age of six, the author states DL did not accept an invitation from
the two Mongol officials who asked him to go to Kokonor (mTsho-kha) and instead DL went to Ri-sgo in
E, southern Tibet (39b).
Here the Dukula is more explicit. DL was only six years old when the invitation was made and he was
in fact escorted away secretly in order to avoid the invitation. It shows clearly the existence of tension
between the dGe-lugs-pa and their Mongol ally.26
In 1624, in the early morning of New Year's day, DL for the first time propitiated the goddess dPal-Idan
Iha-mo on the roof of the dGa'Idan Palace in Drepung when the sun rose and projected its rays on to the
building. According to the author, this propitiation is practiced in accordance with a Tantra entitled dPal ldan
dmag zor rgyal mo'i rgyud. This Tantra is said to contain the myth according to which the goddess moves
with the sun's rays in the early morning (41b-42a). Unlike the biography, the Dukula does not give the name
of the Tantra in question and so it remains unidentified. At any rate, the ritual tradition is still continued by
the Fourteenth Dalai Lama in Dharamsala where early in the morning of the New Years's day the ritual is
performed.
Concerning bSod-nams rab-brtan (1595-1657), the phyag mdzod, "Treasurer", of DL who later rose to
the position of Regent, the author seems to be eager to flatter him by saying that he was, in a previous life,
the famous minister mGar sTong-btsan of King Srong-btsan sgam-po. This is, to my knowledge, the only
source where such a fatuous claim is ever made (506-51a). It is of course connected with the Buddhist belief
that Avalokiteshvara manifested himself in the form of the king and the latter that of DL, hence the Treasurer
as the minister mGar.
In 1632-1633, a number of Mongol interventions began in Tibet. They were mainly involved in the
clash of religious interests between the Karma bka' brgyud and Ge-lugs, particularly since the Fourth Dalai
Lama, who was of Mongol origin, was installed in Drepung. However, the Mongol pillage, on the excuse of
protecting one religious school against another, was so heinous that the author describes the situation by
quoting a Tibetan proverb: "They plundered about like a lion without a bridle under a sky without pillars".27
This is followed by a somewhat rough account of the Mongol interference in Tibet during the years of 1632-
24. bka'chen sogs kyis rje gong ma'i phyag tam rdor dril zhal dkar sogs dam pa de nyid kyis nye bar spyad bya mams
dang/ skye bo gzhan gyi yo byad de 'dra ba dag thun mongs su sku gzhogs su gshibs te gzigs sngar phab pas nged
kyi 'di dang 'di'o thes 'chug med du rang gir mdzad pa sogs ngos 'dzin rnams gsal bar gnang bas der 'khod pa'i
mi rams kyi yid la sngon med pa'i ngo mtshar gyi itsed dga' bskrun zhing (f. 36b2).
25. dka'(bka') bcu bas sku 'dra dang phyag 'phreng sogs bstan byung bangos zin pa'i tha snyad ni ma byung sgo thon
nas ngos 'dzin shin tu yid ches par byung zhes smra zhing sting (rting) ma slob gnyer byed skabs kyang hur thag
ma byas na de skabs ngos 'dzin ni ma byung zhes. (Dukula, Vol. I, p. 55).
26. Dukula, Vol. 1, pp. 60-61.
27. gnam ka med kyi 'og tu seng ge srab med du 'phyo ba Ita bu... (f. 75 'og, b4).



A Most Pleasing Symphony
135
1633. Nevertheless, it shows that the author had a good understanding of the various Mongol factions whose
divisions and origins are not always very clear in the Dukula.
One of the houses in Lhasa where DL often stayed was called dGa'-ldan khang-gsar. In the biography
it is stated that the Treasurer bSod-nams rab-brtan had the house thoroughly renovated in 1647, me phag
(80b). Here the date is wrong. It was in fact in 1634, shing phag. The renovation of the house was
presumably done for DL as his residence in the town although the author does not state whom it originally
belonged to. It was in this house that the Treasurer died in 1657.
More Mongol factious fights, which first broke out in Kokonor in 1637, and the war between the Beri
king and the army of Gushri Khan in Kham in 1641 are recounted in some detail, especially the deeds of the
Mongol Khan and his dreams. These conflicts eventually led to the civil war between the province of gTsang
and that of dBus in Central Tibet in 1641. The war was led by Gushri Khan with his Mongol army on the
side of the Dbus province, bastion of the new Buddhist school, the dGe-lugs-pa, against the king of gTsang,
Karma bstan-skyong dbang-po, and his people who were mainly followers of the Karma bka'-brgyud school
(81b-92b). The accounts of the circumstances which led to the war agree roughly with those of the Dukula.
However, what is not recounted either in the biography or in the Dukula is the history of the total destruction
of the great monastery which the young sovereign Karma bstan-skyong dbang-po spent years in building.
The biography mentions it in a most ambiguous statement as follows:
His (the king) monasteries were simply sealed off into the sphere of that which cannot be
conceived.28
The Dukula is as ambiguous, but in a way more frank on the subject. It states:
In the great religious establishment, supports of body, speech and mind (i.e. statues, books and
stupas), were made; centres for the studies of Sutras, Tantras, medicine, Sanskrit and poetry were
built showing great strength of meritorious work. (The destruction of this religious establishment)
had in fact become the action of demons as described in the hrGyad stong pa,29 because if we
examine the activities of the king it appears to me that he was a religious king. However, it was
not appropriate for me to meet him (in Shigatse) since I had had performed many violent rituals
against him and I could not move about (at Shigatse when I was there in 1642),
Neither the biography nor the Dukula mention the name of the monastery. Moreover, the biography puts its
statement in the plural (dgon sde rnams) which further lessens the importance of what seems to have in fact
been a crucial question which he, the author, perhaps thought too embarrassing for the dGe-lugs-pa
authorities to be clearly stated. What is certain is that both sources refer to the same famous monastery
normally known as bKra-shis zil-gnon, "The one which overpowers bKra-shis (Ihun-po)" in de-lugs-pa
sources. It is said to have been built and is situated between the Tashilhunpo monastery and the fort of Sam-
grub-rtse. The same sources usually maintain that the monastery was founded in order to contest the
authority of Tashilhunpo, but who founded it and how it was finally destroyed were never clearly recorded
in the sources that I have so far seen. However, the compilers of the Sa skya'i gdung rahs have fortunately
taken a special interest in recording the events since a member of the Sa-skya family was involved in
founding the monastery. He was Kun-dga' bsod-nams lhun-grub (1571-1642). He studied at Ngor and later
became the abbot of the rTse-gdong establishment, hence he was known as rTse-gdong zhabs-drung. He was
a brother-in-law of the king Karma bstan-skyong dbang-po (1604-1642). The king first married bSod-nams
28. khong rang gi dgon sde rnamis dmigs med kyi dbyings su bsngo huli rgyas 'debs kho na mdzad 'dug... (f. 106a3).
29. The Tibetan Tripitaka, Vol. 21, No. 734, Chapter 11.
30. chos sde chen po der sku gsung thugs rten dang mdo sitgags gso rig sgra snyan gy 'chad nyan dzugs pa'i dri
gt sang khang k ra bọas pas ts/ton paidge stabs de bread slots pa tats bella ai bid las S4 Nog dog
kyang mdgad pa la dpag na sde srid de chos rgyal zhig vin pa 'dra brani pa shar/ nged rung gis las sbyor
mangsang) pali stahs ky's nigos mjal dang rgvu igrul byed ma nus/(Dukula. Vol. I, p. 217).
31. Cl. P/ p. 323.



136
Samten G Karmay
rnam-rgyal bu-khrid, an elder sister of his who died, and later married bSod-nams tshe-brtan bu-khrid, the
younger sister.
It appears from the account in the Sa skya'i gdung rabs that Tse-gdong zhabs-drung, who was a
prominent master, was virtually a prisoner as chaplain at bSam-'grub-rtse, but he seems to have played a
vital role in the founding of the monastery by the king. The king himself gave the name bDe-chen chos-
khor to the new monastery. From the account in the gdung rabs it is clear that it was intended to be a centre
of eclectic approach and was far from being simply an establishment of the Karma bka-brgyud school as
the dGe-lugs-pa sources would have us believed. The king is said to have received a deep impression from
the temples at Gyantse when he visited it in his childhood. It was certainly a large Buddhist centre of
worship and learning with eighteen temples and four colleges, a fact that is echoed in the statement made
by DL in the Dukula cited above. rTse-gdong zhabs-drung himself is said to have complained about the
monastery being too big and having too many temples due to the unreflective enthusiasm of the youthful
king. Since neither the biography nor the Dukula mention the name bkra-shis zil-gnon, it was probably
created by later dGe-lugs-pa propagandists.
In 1642, the monastery was completely destroyed and looted by the forces of Gushri Khan, comprising
both Tibetans and Mongols just before the capture of the bSam-'grub-rtse fort, which was cut off from
supplies for several months. Towards the end of the siege rTse-gdong zhabs-drung died in the fort. He was
71 and the king was led to Tashilhunpo after the fort was taken.
The biography is silent on all these points probably due to the painful and fresh memories as only four
years had passed since the events took place. However, in the statement of the Dukula cited above, DL
expresses his regret that such an incident had occurred and describes the destruction of the monastery as
"action of the demon" (bdud las).
In the rest of the biography, there does not seem to be any great divergence from the accounts given in
the Dukula. The biography brings the account up to the year 1646. In the third month of the same year dKon-
mchog chos-'phel died and DL composed a prayer for the reincarnation of the master.
Abbreviations/bibliography
BS Bai dūrya ser po, dGa' Idan chos 'byung bai dūrya ser po by sDe-srid Sangs-rgyas rgya-mtsho
(1653-1705). Krung go'i bod kyi shes rig dpe skrun khang 1989.
Dukula Za hor gyi ban de ngag dbang blo bzang rgya mtsho'i 'di snang 'khrul ba'i rol rtsed rtogs briod kyi
Ishul du bkod pa du ku la'i gos bzang by Ngag-dbang blo-bzang rgya-mtsho (1617-1682). Lhasa:
Bod ljongs mi dnangs dpe skran khang 1989, Vols. I-III.
KGZ dGa'ba'i zlos gar, dPal brug pa rin po che rgyal dbang thams cad mkhyen pa dpag bsam dbang po
thub bstan yongs 'du'i dpal gyi sde'i mam par thar pa skal bzang kun tu dga' ba'i zlos gar by Dus-
zhabs-pa dPal-rgyas dbang-po (written in 1657 at Khro-phu dga' Idan byams pa'i gling). MS from
the library of Mr. Gene Smith, ff. 175.
MLh Ma bcos thugs pa, rGyal khams pa ta ra na thas bdag nyid kyi rnam thar nges par brjod pa'i deb
gter shin tu zhib mo ma bcos thug pa'i rtogs brjod by Taranatha. Indian edition. n.p., n.d.
dPag bsam ljon bzang. Chos 'byung dpag bsam ljon bzang by Sum-pa Ye-shes dpal-'byor (1705-
1788), Kan su'u mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 1992.
PNY dPag bsam rin po che'i snye ma, rGyal ba'i dbang po thams cad mkhyen gzigs rdo rje 'chang blo
bzang hskal bzang rgya mtsho dpal bzang po zhal snga nas kyi rnam par thar pa mdo tsam brjod pa
dpag bsam rin po che'i snye ma (completed in 1759) by ICang-skya Rol-pa'i rdo-rje (1717-1786),
Lhasa, Bod ljongs mi dmạngs dpe skran khang, Vols. I-II, 1990,
PJ
32, SD p. 90.
33. SD pp. 91-104.
34. P/ p. 323.
35, SD p. 105-109,



A Most Pleasing Symphony
137
RSNy Rab gsal gser gyi snye ma, Thams cad mkhyen pa drug pa blo bzang rin chen tshangs dbyangs rgya
mtsho'i thun mong phyi'i rnam par thar pa du ku la'i 'phro thud rab gsal gser gyi snye ma by sDe-
srid Sangs-rgyas rgya-mtsho, Lhasa: Bod ljongs mi dmangs dpe skrun khang, 1989.
SD Sa skya'i gdung rabs, dpal ldan sa skya pa'i gdung rabs rin po che byon ishul zhal skong bcas
bsdoms shing thag par dus mchod bla brang pa'i gdung rabs kha yod lag yod du bgrangs pa gdan
rabs bcas kyi lo rgyus ngo mtshar srid na 'gran bral by Kun dga' blo-gros and mThu-stobs dbang-
phyug, Mi rigs dpe skrun khang 1991.



KHA-CHE LUGS AND
THE WOOD SCULPTURES FROM CHARANG
Deborah Klimburg-Salter
According to Tibetan tradition, as contained in Tāranātha's History, among other sources, Tibetan art until
about the 14th century was dependent for its inspiration on foreign sources. Generally Tibetan art is
considered to have three main regional schools, east, central and western Tibet. For the earliest periods only
the artistic traditions which influenced the formation of the arts of central and western Tibet are discussed.
My concern here is the formative period of western Tibetan art 10th-12th centuries.
Until now no consistent methodology has been employed for identifying artistic sources for western
Tibetan art. Literary evidence indicates only the broad outlines of this process. Taranātha tells us that the art
of western India influenced Kashmir which influenced Tibet. Scholarship has identified to date, only one
example of the influence of western Indian painting on the art of a monastery, Tabo, within the western
Tibetan kingdom. The Tabo paintings are dated c. 1042. At least one of the two groups of paintings
(Klimburg-Salter 1999/2000) identified with western Indian influence may be a result of a local or Kashmiri
workshop. In this example, in the Tabo 'du-khang Life of the Buddha murals, the western Indian influences
had been fully integrated prior (Klimburg-Salter 1997: fig. 129) to their production. We have no way of
defining the area where this workshop originated. As this example shows, the possible geographic area is
large. Literary sources do not assist us. The Tibetan term to designate a Kashmiri art school, Kha-che lugs,
is rarely used and then only in sources considerably later than our period (Klimburg-Salter forthcoming).
Let us take a parallel example: Täranātha identifies Päla-Sena and Nepalese art as sources for the
Buddhist art of central Tibet. Here, however, a large body of art historical and archaeological evidence, some
of it in situ, is available. Thus, allowing one to define precisely the northeast Indian images and their visual
vocabulary. Only after defining the northeast Indian and/or Nepalese sources that may have served as proto-
types for Tibetan art (Allinger 1998 and Bautze-Picron 1998) can we discuss the character of early central
Tibetan art, which derived from it. Ideally, it is this method, within the limited resources available for
Kashmir, which I would like to propose. That is, to build up a corpus of securely attributed works of Kashmir
art which may have served as proto-types for the earliest Buddhist art produced under West Tibetan
patronage in the 10th-12th centuries. It is then necessary to define the vocabulary of forms used at different
times and at different sites in Kashmir.
All scholars since Tucci (Tucci 1949: 273 f., Rhie 1999: 49; Rhie coins the term "Kashmir Himachal
Pradesh") have described both monumental and portable western Tibetan art, such as from Tholing (m Tho-
ling/ -Iding), Tabo, and Alchi, as being Kashmiri in inspiration without a single specific reference point.
Vitali (e.g. 1996: 273) uses the hybrid term "Kha-che art." Quite simply, too little later Buddhist art has
survived in Kashmir itself and the archaeological record is inadequate. Despite Naudou's (1968) exhaustive
analysis he was unable with certainty to identify any of the Tibetan names for places or temples in Kashmir.
Nonetheless, the literary tradition as well as the colophons to the translated texts in the Tibetan canon (bka'.
'gyur and bsTan-'gyur) confirm the collaboration of Kashmiri pandits with Tibetan lamas, many of whom
worked at Tholing, the main monastery of the kingdom of sPu-rang Gu-ge in the 11th-12th centuries, now
divided between India (Himachal Pradesh and Ladakh) and West Tibet.
The translation of the texts was essential to the process of establishing "correct" Mahāyāna Buddhism
as the state religion of the kingdom of sPu-rang Gu-ge. The dynamic process of transferring the Mahāyāna
Sanskrit tradition to Tibet was of such great importance that later historians came to refer to this period as
1. Kha-che lugs is also used to designate a Vinaya school



Kha-che lugs and The Wood Sculptures from Charang
139
the phyi-dar, the Later Diffusion of Buddhism. The physical environment for this religious practice were the
newly founded temples supported by noble patrons and their main preceptor, The Great Translator Rin-chen
bzang-po. His biography records that the temples (according to pious tradition 108) were each provided with
the three supports (rten-gsum) of body, speech, and mind-paintings and sculptures, texts, and mchod-rten.
Rin-chen bzang-po's biography (henceforth called the Biography) lists large numbers of texts and artifacts
which were donated to specific temples. In order to fulfill this large demand, the Biography tells us both
artists and artifacts were brought by the Great Translator from Kashmir to the kingdom of sPu-rang Gu-ge.
In addition objects must have been made locally. Thus, the Biography describes a process of the transmission
of Kashmiri visual culture to the western Tibetan kingdom analogous to the translation of sacred Sanskrit
texts into Tibetan. But the artistic evidence for this process is extremely scarce. Not one of these objects can
today be identified with certainty. Nor has it been possible to define precisely the artistic sources and the
visual vocabulary which inspired the art of the newly founded temples in the kingdom of sPu-rang Gu-ge,
that is until now.
The purpose of this short study is to briefly discuss three of eight large-size wooden sculptures in the
temple of Rang-rig-rtse in the village of Charang, Kinnaur. The temple is listed in Rin-chen bzang-po's
Biography as rTsa-rang (Charang) where it is included in the list of 21 yul-chung. The temple was first
identified by Tucci (1933: 57, 33), but never visited by him because of its present inaccessibility. It is
precisely, however, its geographic position which explains the importance of the temple.
The Charang wooden sculptures will be compared to three inscribed metal sculptures which can be
securely attributed to Kashmir. The life-size clay sculptures in the Tabo 'du-khang serve as our stylistic
benchmark for the Indo-Tibetan art of the mid-11th century,
We shall first briefly review the historical setting for the Buddhist art of Kinnaur during the time of the
kings of sPu-rang Gu-ge in the 10th-12th centuries. Secondly the art historical problems presented by a study
of the Buddhist art of Kashmir, 8th-11th centuries, which served as the prototypes for the newly emerging
Indo-Tibetan art. This is followed by a comparative analysis of the two groups of images, I will conclude with
some theoretical considerations concerning the study of this formative period in the art of western Tibet.
The Historical Context
Local historians believe that Kinnaur was included in the Gupta Empire; subsequently the region was
annexed by the Hephtalites when they occupied Kashmir. Lower Kinnaur, during the 7th century belonged
to the empire ruled by Harsa of Kanauj. According to the tradition of the kings of Bashahr, Kinnaur was the
eastern most territory of their realm. Their earliest capital (from the 5th century) was at Kamru in the Sangla
valley, then Sarahan and finally their winter capital was moved to Rampur, so that their administrative center
moved steadily westward towards Shimla (Bajpai 1991: 31).
Buddhism may have been present in some form and in some places in Kinnaur from a relatively early
date but we have no firm evidence for this. There is only one structure which may predate the missionary
activities of the kings of sPu-rang Gu-ge, the small temple of Ribba (Klimburg-Salter, in print).
The art historical evidence for a Buddhist presence in Kinnaur during the period of the phyi-dar is
abundant. Temples and artifacts which can be approximately dated to this period on the basis of stylistic and
literary evidence occupy an area from Sangla valley in the west to the Shipki pass in mNga-ris, Tibet (map
1). Although a few of these monuments, such as a small Lo-tsa-ba lha-khang in Tangi (map 2), have not yet
been identified in literary sources, most of the other known temples are mentioned in Rin-chen bzang-po's
Biography. Of the entire area ruled by the dynasty of the kings of sPu-rang Gu-ge in the 10th-12th c. only
the Gu-ge heartland has more foundations dating to this period. See the map attached for villages where
temples or large scale images, which were originally to be associated with temples of this period, are located.
Many of these temples, on the map, contain wooden sculpture or fragments of wooden architectural
elements in a Kashmiri style.



140
Deborah Klimburg-Salter
The only archaeological evidence for the presence of this dynasty in Kinnaur is the so-called Ye-shes-
'od rdo-ring in dkor in modern Poo (sPu in Rin-chen bzang-po's Biography) (Klimburg-Salter 1994b: 55,
fig. 1), according to Petech, this rdo-ring, may have been erected by the lha-sras Na-ga-ra-dza, the same
royal lama whose name appears on the Cleveland Buddha. He is also represented together with his father
tha bla-ina Ye-shes-'od in the Tabo sgo-khang (Klimburg-Salter 1997: 85). Also in Poo is a small Iha-khang
attributed by local tradition to Rin-chen bzang-po, containing three clay sculptures which may well date to
this period (Luczanits 1996: figs. 11, 11a, 11b, 12).
In the small temple of Ropa (Ro-pag of the Biography) are a number of wooden sculptures attributable
to this period (Klimburg-Salter 1994a: 69) (as will be discussed below). Particularly important are two life-
size wooden sculptures (Klimburg-Salter 1994a: figs. 57, 58; Luczanits 1996: fig. 10) of Vajrapāni and
Avalokitesvara which are also in the Kashmiri style (see map).
The history of Kinnaur based on Tibetan historical sources remains to be written, however, we can
summarize some general points. Modern Kinnaur, which in part is called usually Rong-chung in the pre-
modern Tibetan texts, seems to have belonged to the Tibetan empire from an early date. The mNga'-ris
rgyal-rabs refers to Jo-bo rgyal-po as king of Khu-nu (Vitali 1996: 75, 1. 16) and 'Od-bar-rtse as king of
Rong-chung (Vitali 1996: 75, 1. 17). As the text is organized geographically Rong-chung and Khu-nu must
be next to each other. However it is clear, as Vitali also noted (Vitali 1996: 268) that there were two Rong-
chung, one in present-day upper Kinnaur (according to the Biography sPu (= Poo) is in Rong-chung) and
one in Gu-ge. The lower Spiti river (present day Kinnaur where Nako (Na-go) and Chango are located)
appears to have been the region known as Cog-la in the Tabo inscriptions. This area includes the lower Spiti
valley and Tabo as far as Po. What remains to the west of Poo may have been called Khu-nu (as the area
around Charang is still called) or Rong-chung, as on Cunningham's map (map 3). Vitali believes that IDe-
gtsug-mgon, the youngest son of Nyi-ma-mgon, included Khu-nu in his realm, thus after his untimely death:
“Pi.ti, Khu.nu and Zangs.dkar were merged into Gu.ge Pu.hrang" (Vitali 1996:293). The history of the term
Khu-nu is unclear. This citation only demonstrates that by the end of the 15th century when the mNga'-ris
rgyal-rabs was written, the designation Khu-nu, as distinct from Rong-chung was in use. The exact
boundaries of Khu-nu during this period are unclear.
Thus, Khu-nu belonged to the kingdom inherited by Ye-shes-'od. It would be reasonable to assume that
the four larger temples built by Ye-shes-'od in his earliest missionary phase were located in the areas most
important to the kingdom at that time. Kinnaur is not mentioned in this context. According to Rin-chen
bzang-po's Biography several temples were founded later in Kinnaur, they appear in the Biography in the
list of yul-chung- smaller places (cf. Klimburg-Salter 1985: 33-36). The largest, and therefore probably
the most important of these, is the monastery of Rang-rig-rtse in Charang on the Indo-Tibetan border where
the eight wooden sculptures are preserved. We shall return to this temple below. However, Vitali suggests
that some other minor temples may have been built in Khu-nu during Ye-shes-'od's first missionary period,
but this is uncertain. According to this interpretation Rong-chung was the larger area and included Khu-nu.
The latter was the western border area of the Pu-rang Gu-ge kingdom.
2. As this stone was erected in a dragon year Petech (1997: 235) proposes 1024 (A.D.). I have also earlier proposed
that the title used in this stone inscription dpal tha btsan-po lha bla-ma Ye-shes-'od indicates a later date than the
Tabo inscription of 996. The name su occurs on the stele which is to be associated with modern Poo, actually the
present village/market place. Poo is subdivided into several residential groupings lower downhill, including the area
called "Khor where the stele is still to be found in the middle of the vegetable field. My several attempts to locate
ancient walls among the stone rubble yielded nothing,
3. The most important primary sources are the different edition of Rin-chen bzang-po's Biography and the mNga'-ris
rgyal-rabs.
4. According to various historical sources summarized by Petech (1997) in c. 996, four main temples were founded:
Tholing (Gu-ge), Kha-char (sPu-rang), both now in Tibet, Nyar-ma (Ladakh), and Tabo (Spiti), Himachal Pradesh.



Kha-che lugs and The Wood Sculptures from Charang
14!
Buddhist Art in Kashmir
Kashmir was at times politically powerful and at other times weaker, but its culture dominated all the
surrounding regions. Because of its importance, the boundaries of Kashmir have been discussed many times.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Cunningham and Stein noted that over time not only had the
political boundaries changed but also the topographic landmarks, such as riverbeds. According to the first
boundary commission of 1846 the Kashmir administrative territory included Ladakh and Zanskar and was
bordered by Lahul and Spiti to the east, Kinnaur is not mentioned in this discussion.
Historians usually use the term "Kashmir" to refer to the Kashmir valley, formed by the upper Jhelum
river basin. Earlier in the Buddhist period Baramulla was the capital, later Shrinagar. At times when Kashmir
was politically powerful, as in the early 11th century, its domains extended southward to Lohāra and
eastward to include Kulu. Based on literary evidences, Naudou concluded that the Tibetan term for Kashmir,
Kha-che referred to the areas to the west of Tibet. Rin-chen bzang-po's Biography refers to Kinnaur (Rong-
chung) as a border region. Indeed, further to the east, Tabo monastery in the Spiti valley was, according to
the Blue Annals, a place where Sanskrit pandits came to learn Tibetan. Naudou combined Täranātha's
references with the information obtained from many other sources, particularly colophons of texts included
in the Tibetan Canon, which record joint translation projects between Sanskrit pandits and Tibetan lamas.
Kashmiri cities and monasteries in the Tibetan sources are known only by their Tibetan names, which
are not now unequivocally identifiable. According to the colophons, most of the translators worked at
Tholing. Tibetan literary evidence depicts a brilliant Buddhist intellectual tradition, embattled in its
homeland, which migrated eastward towards Tibet over a several hundred-year period.
If we compare map 1 which shows the foundations of the 10th-12th centuries with one prepared by
Naudou (1968) of "Greater Kashmir" during the same period, we see that the south-eastern border of
Kashmir reaches the region of modern lower Kinnaur. Thus, we may imagine the role of the Kinnauri
monasteries as an intermediary between Kashmiri institutions and the main institutions of the kingdom of
sPu-rang Gu-ge at Tholing and Khojarnath.
Let us look at the historical context. Support of Buddhist institutions in Kashmir was in steady decline
following the demise of the Karkoța dynasty. We know that Queen Diddā, who died 1003, patronized
Buddhism as well as Brahmanical foundations. Only one new Buddhist foundation is known during the long
reign of Anata and his wife Süryamati (1028-1063) (Kalhana, book 7, pp. 180-185).
During this time, according to Kalhana, Kashmir was sinking into economic chaos and misery,
Contributing factors were the incompetence of its ministers and certainly the high taxes exacted in order to
support the defense against the Muslim armies attacking from the south. It is not to be forgotten that
Mahmud of Ghazni was only stopped at 1015 and 1021 at Lohära, which is the southern boundary of the
Kashmiri Empire. However, despite, the unstable social and economic life a high level of artistic and
intellectual creativity was achieved. It is during this time that some of the greatest of Kashmiri scholars
lived, to mention only two, Abhinavagupta at the end of the 10th/beginning of the 11th century and
Kşemendra, whose Avadānakalpalata was completed in 1053. It is also in the 11th century however, that the
texts identify many famous scholars who sought patronage and refuge at the monasteries supported by the
kings of sPu-rang Gu-ge. In 1076, the great council at Tholing attracted famous scholars from a wide
geographic area to discuss various points of Buddhist doctrine.
In this context it is particularly interesting to remember the following well known two sculptures. Both
objects are inscribed and mention historical personages. The inscription on the Sugatisandarśana Lokeśvara
5. Both monasteries possessed monumental wooden portals, which Tucci considered to have been produced by
Kashmiri craftsmen.
6. According to scholarly consensus as well as laboratory examination, the inscriptions may be considered
contemporaneous with the fabrication of the objects. And both objects may be securely attributed to Kashmir.



142
Deborah Klimburg-Salter
(Fig. 1) in ſărada records the name of Queen Diddā who reigned from 980 to 1003, while the Tibetan
inscription on the Buddha image records that the icon belonged to the royal preceptor lha brsun-pa Na-ga-
ra-dza, (Fig. 2) the younger son of the king of sPu-rang Gu-ge, Iha bla-ma Ye-shes-'od. This prince was
active at the end of the 10th and the beginning of the 11th century.?
What is interesting here is that while art historians have always considered these sculptures to be
roughly contemporary (c. 1000 A.D.), they are never discussed in the same context. The standing Buddha
sculpture has always been taken to be an example of the Indo-Tibetan art of the phyi-dar in the western
Himalaya. The seated Bodhisattva has always been considered a superb example of the art of Kashmir or
greater northwest India. But in fact, each image represents a standard Kashmir image-type. The Buddha with
the Tibetan inscription (Fig. 2) belongs to a large series of images with the same rectangular stepped pedestal
and a distinct post-Gupta figure style (e.g. Pal 1975: Pl. 27, 28).
The Queen Diddā image, stylistically and iconographically, is the model for a number of slightly later
images, e.g, a Lokeśvara in the British Museum (Klimburg-Salter 1982: Pl. 31) and a Sugatisandarśana
Lokeśvara in the Pan-Asian Collection (Pal 1975: Pl. 50).
A third sculpture of a jeweled Buddha (Fig. 3) seated between two stūpas likewise bears an inscription
however in an earlier script, Proto-Śārada (see Klimburg-Salter 1982: Pl. 9 for the inscription and detailed
description). The inscription identifies the patrons as a nobleman and his wife who may be associated with
the realm of the Gilgit Śāhi in northern Pakistan. Following the work of von Hinüber, the object may be
dated to c. 734.
What have these three sculptures in common? First, they can now all be attributed to Kashmir
workshops (Reedy 1997: 144-175), despite the fact that two of the patrons are not from Kashmir. All the
patrons belong to the nobility and all three images are of superior technical accomplishment. Each image
may be identified with a popular image type. But the most interesting feature that they have in common is
that each of these image-types were copied in wood at a somewhat later date at the farthest eastern boundary
of the Kashmir kingdom, or seen from another perspective, on the western boundary of the western Tibetan
kingdom. Thus, finally allowing us to identify specific Kashmiri image types which served as the inspiration
for western Tibetan art created in the kingdom during the 10th-12th centuries, and to trace the process of
adaptation of the Kashmiri image-type into the western Tibetan stylistic idiom.
The Temple
The temple of Rang-rig-rtse is located on a promontory which lies at 3,500 meters high, about two
kilometers from the village of Charang. The temple is placed at the conjunction of three passes leading
south-west to India, the Charang and Mangsu passes, and the Khimkul pass leading eastward towards Tibet.
This latter pass actually provides the most direct route to Tholing, the religious center of the kings of sPu-
rang Gu-ge, as one can see here on Cunningham's 19th century map (map 3). The evidence from the 15th
century art and manuscripts still in the temple, suggest that Rang-rig-rtse may have been connected to
Tholing monastery (Klimburg-Salter forthcoming). Rang-rig-rtse is the main temple on the parikrama
around the Kinnaur Kailash (map 2). All the other chapels on the parikrama are also attributed to Rin-chen
bzang-po and indeed appear to be quite ancient.
A complex of buildings belonging to the recently founded nunnery today surrounds the temple (Fig. 4).
As these buildings are included in the skor-lam (ritual path of circumambulation), it seems reasonable to
presume that the present complex represents the original concept of the monastery.
7. Vitali (1996) proposes that the image was made between 998 and 1026 when he died. In 996 in the Tabo sgo-khang
Na-ga-ra-dza was still called Tha-sras (prince).
8. Because of the strategic location between the three passes which connect India with Tibet, the military border police
also have stationed themselves on this promontory



Kha-che lugs and The Wood Sculptures from Charang
143
Rang-rig-rtse is the largest Buddhist temple in Himachal Pradesh, but little remains from an early
period. There was substantial repainting following the 1976 earthquake. Most of the remaining wall
paintings date to ca. late 15th-16th centuries. The clay images of the Vairocana mandala also have been
repaired but the core goes back to an early date. This temple will be treated in a separate study (Klimburg-
Salter, forthcoming). The architecture and the architectural decoration will not be discussed here. The
architect John Harrison, assisted by Michael Falser, prepared the drawings published here during our field
work in 1998.
Indo-Tibetan Sculptures
In the temple of Rang-rig-rtse eight portable wooden sculptures have been preserved. The only feature of a
comparable age in the temple is a carved wooden architectural element which probably once was a lintel and
is now used in the door swell of the portal to the assembly hall. Thus there was almost certainly a temple
here that can be considered contemporary with the wooden sculptures. Because of the extreme isolation of
the temple I propose as a working hypothesis, that these sculptures are the fragmentary remains of sculptures
originally intended for this temple. A comparative stylistic analysis will allow us to identify three stylistic
phases in the development of wooden sculptures through the 11th century. I use here the term Indo-Tibetan
for these sculptures because this sculptural style evolved from an Indian (here Kashmir) prototype but the
sculptures were made for a Tibetan patron and were intended for use in a Tibetan cultural context.
While it is not possible here to discuss all eight of these sculptures in detail I would like to note that
some of them may have belonged to a Vajradhātu mandala (e.g. Figs. 5-10). The figures are well finished
on the back and there is no evidence that they were ever attached to the wall. There is a low ledge running
around the back of the temple under the present clay mandala - the figures may once have stood there.
From an iconographic point of view one of the most interesting sculptures is the crowned image (Fig. 9)
which I have very tentatively identified as Maitreya in the form the deity takes when occupying the eastern
quarter of the outer gallery of the main circle (de Mallmann 1986: 58) of the Vajradhātu mandala NSP 19
(ibid. 57ff). This identification is based on the figure of Akşobhya in the central part of the crown and the
fact that the image appears to have been originally painted blue, (de Mallmann 1986: 245) note the fore legs
and other sections of the figure where blue is clearly visible underneath the more recent red paint. The
figure sits on a shallow double lotus in the meditation posture under an elaborate pointed arch which is the
superstructure of a throne supported by two lions and the small figure in between, a typical Kashmir motif
found in many contexts. The deity wears a three-pointed jeweled cape over a naked torso. The cape has a
wide floral fringe; the center of the cape is filled with a wide necklace. He also wears jeweled arm and wrist
bands. The three-pointed crown, each section adorned with a Buddha figure, sits on a jeweled band tied
behind the head with the bands flying out stiffly behind. There are rosettes above each ear and large round
earrings. No part of the monastic gown is to be seen engraved on the body except for the folds of the
monastic robe which are shown beneath the crossed legs. A mālā which is here represented as a rope goes
around the shoulders and under the legs in a "u" shape. A comparison with the main element of the
Rockefeller crowned Buddha (Fig. 3) demonstrates that the Charang Buddha is a simplified version of the
former image type. It would seem in fact that the prototype was not completely understood. The Charang
Buddha may in fact be a third generation, or later copy. The monastic gown, indicated by the folds lying on
the lotus, otherwise is completely missing. The beautiful articulation of the mālā of the Kashmir sculpture
is also lost and the gently swelling rounded petals of the lotus throne are drastically reduced.
There are also significant differences in the figure style, whereas the Kashmir sculpture shows the
typical slightly rounded belly of the period, the Charang sculpture is flat. At first glance the pleasant oval
9. The evidence for the chronology of the present temple is presented elsewhere (Klimburg-Salter forthcoming).
10. The overlarge throne and lion supports would suggest Vairocana. Singh 1997: 886 identifies this figure as Manjusri.



144
Deborah Klimburg-Salter
face of the Bodhisattva with the gently arched eyebrows appears close to metal sculptures attributed to
Kashmir, but closer examination of the facial features shows certain divergent elements most notably the
totally round bulbous chin. Interestingly this feature is represented in the late 11th century-paintings from
Nako by a round shaded circle on the chin (Klimburg-Salter 1997: 215, fig. 226). Another point of
comparison to the art of Himachal Pradesh is the manner in which the crown sits on the head. In the Kashmir
sculpture of the c. 8th century the hair is only barely indicated, indeed in the Rockefeller image the crown
may rest on a cloth band. In the clay sculptures of the Tabo mandala (Klimburg-Salter 1997: 103, 107, e.
fig. 102) the crown sits high on the hair. Compare the detail (ibid. fig. 102) with the representation of the
hair in Fig. 10 here, in both cases the thick black hair is pulled up from the forehead and the hair forms
parallel curved lines, at the center of the forehead the hair forms two swirls moving outward from the center
line. This feature is derived from the art of Kashmir and can be seen on numerous images from the late 9th
century. The thick stiff ribbons of the crown placed flat against the pointed halo may be compared to a
wooden sculpture of Vajradharma in Ropa temple in upper Kinnaur attributable to the second half of the
11th c. (Luczanits 1996: 75, fig. 13). Many of the stylistic features we have mentioned here are found in the
stylistically related sculptures figs. 7 and 8. In addition, in these sculptures the torso and belly are visible
and have a more exaggerated variant of the four-part belly, the typical articulated rounded belly and secret
navel associated with the art of Kashmir late 9th-10th century. Thus it does not seem possible to date these
wooden figures (Figs. 7, 8, 9) in Charang earlier than the 11th century. As we shall see these sculptures may
be the earliest of the Charang group.
The large image of Lokeśvara (Figs. 11 and 12) is very close to the Queen Didda sculpture of
Sugatisandarśana Lokeśvara (Fig. 1; see also Pal 1975: Pl. 51 a,b) in the Sri Pratap Singh Museum,
Shrinagar. Although the Charang figure has two instead of six arms other details, which are similar, are the
fan-shaped topknot, the triangular form of the Buddha Amitābha, the arrangement of the hair over the
forehead, the lotus seat placed on a raised round drum, the tripartite pedestal to allow for two small attendant
figures, which are however different. On the other hand one sees a similar tendency to exaggerate the
familiar Kashmiri stylistic features. The Charang Lokeśvara has a harder, stronger "V-shaped" line forming
the eyebrows and the nose, the mouth has a more pronounced bulbous lower lip, and again we find the round
protruding chin. Rather than the subtle Kashmir modeling, the modeling of the torso is here more
pronounced, likewise the drum is more elongated, rather disproportionate. Quite different is the manner in
which the hair spills out from the top knot in thick braids flowing over the shoulders. This is a typical feature
found in several wooden sculptures in Himachal Pradesh, the standing Bodhisattvas as well as the small
wooden images in Ropa (Luczanits 1996; fig. 3). Thus again we see a transformation of the Kashmiri image
type into a more local idiom. This Charang Lokeśvara could not be dated early than the late 11th,
12th centuries.
The seated Buddha on a high articulated platform (Fig. 13) diverges from the Na-ga-ra-dza Buddha in
that the latter is standing, and also has a rounded more graceful figure style. As we have also noticed in Fig.
11, the figure style of the Charang Buddha is represented in a flatter, more schematized manner; only the
ripple effect at the edge of the robe breaks the monotony of the flat unarticulated torso. Similar to the profile
of the head of the Kashmir Buddha is the rounded shape of the uşnişa and the tight snail curls of the hair.
Similar to the Charang Buddha is Fig. 11, in that there are also the sharp angular lines describing the facial
features, but here (Fig. 13) the exaggerated pouting mouth merges with the chin. We see in Fig. 13 a further
step in the direction of the local stylistic tendency to a flatter, thinner figure style. Furthermore, the Indo-
Tibetan image resulting from a transformation of the Kashmiri image types, although most numerous at
Rang-rig-rtse, are found throughout Kinnaur.
Unfortunately, the evidence provided by the wooden sculptures of Rang-rig-rtse is limited by their
portable nature. Their high quality, particularly figures 7, 8, and 9 and close coincidence with Kashmiri
prototypes might suggest production by Kashmiri artists. On the other hand all the images show the



Kha-che lugs and The Wood Sculptures from Charang
145
misunderstanding of certain elements which suggest that the artist may never have seen an example of the
Kashmiri prototype, which speaks rather in favor of local artists trained in a workshop perhaps once
associated with Kashmir masters. It is of course impossible to say. And one asks oneself how important this
question really is. Does it make much difference if we are dealing with a Kashmiri artist himself, or a
descendent of a workshop begun or directly influenced by the presence of Kashmiri artists?"
Let us return to the map which shows the religious foundations of the time of the kings of sPu-rang Gu-
ge (map 1). Two of the 10th-century foundations in West Tibet, Tholing and Khojarnath, had monumental
wooden portals believed by Tucci to have been products of Kashmiri workmen. Both these temples are
connected to Kinnaur by the route passing near Charang. Whether dealing with monumental portals in West
Tibet or the portable sculptures in Charang, the unresolved problem remains the same.
This problem naturally leads us to the question of the definition of Kha-che lugs. As we have
demonstrated that the Charang sculptures followed Kashmir image-types (whether from originals or first
generation is irrelevant), it would seem reasonable to assume that the Charang sculptures be designated as
in the Kashmir tradition or school.
The more interesting question involves the process of cultural interaction and the transmission of visual
forms. Perhaps one may imagine a situation in the visual arts analogous to the process of translation of the
sacred texts, which was always accomplished by teams of Indian and Tibetan scholars working together. In
the 11th century, Kashmir was experiencing serious economic and political disruption. However, the
centuries old Buddhist monasteries, famed throughout India and Inner Asia still housed Buddhist masters of
considerable reputation whose skills were eagerly sought by the kings of sPu-rang Gu-ge and their
preceptors in the process of founding numerous new temples throughout the western Himalaya. Thus, there
may have been workshops of local craftsmen working for generations with the occasional input of Kashmiri
masters. These Kashmiri artists, together with religious scholars, traveled eastward to flourishing
monasteries in West Tibet where together with local artists they created the Buddhist renaissance known to
the Tibetans as the Later Diffusion of Buddhism.
Bibliography
Allinger. E. (1998) The Green Tārā in the Ford-Collection: some stylistic remarks. The Inner Asian
International Style 12th-14th Centuries. Papers presented at a panel of the 7th seminar of the
International Association for Tibetan Studies, Graz 1995, eds. D. E. Klimburg-Salter and E. Allinger,
Vienna, Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 107-119.
Bajpai, S. C. (1991) Kinnaur. A restricted land in the Himalayas, New Delhi.
Bautze-Picron, C. (1998) The elaboration of a style: Eastern Indian motifs and forms in Early Tibetan (?)
and Burmese painting. The Inner Asian International Style 12th-14th Centuries. Papers presented at a
panel of the 7th seminar of the International Association for Tibetan Studies, Graz 1995, eds. D. E.
Klimburg-Salter and E. Allinger, Vienna, Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 15-65.
Chattopadhyaya, D. (1970) Täranātha's History of Buddhism in India (1608 AD), translated from the
Tibetan, rGya gar chos 'byung, or dGos 'dod kun 'byung, Simla, Indian Institute of Advanced Study.
Cunningham, A. (1854) Ladák - physical, statistical, and historical, with notes of the surrounding countries,
London.
Fussman, G. (1993) Chilas, Hatun et les bronzes bouddhiques du Cachemire. Antiquities of Northern
Pakistan, Vol. 2, 1-60.
Hinüber, O. von (1979) Die Erforschung der Gilgit-Handschriften (Funde buddhistischer Sanskrit-
Handschriften, 1). Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Göttingen, Philologisch-
historische Klasse, 12, 327-360.
11. The desire to attribute works of art with Tibetan content to Indian artists has recently become fashionable, e.g.
Singer and Kossak (1998).



146
Deborah Klimburg-Salter
Klimburg-Salter, D. E. (1982) The Silk Route and the Diamond Path: Esoteric Buddhist Art on the Trans-
Himalayan Trade Routes, Los Angeles, UCLA Art Council.
Klimburg-Salter, D. E. (1985) The Tucci Archives preliminary study, 1: Notes on the chronology of Ta-pho
'du-khang. East and West, 35 (1-3), 13-40.
Klimburg-Salter, D. E. (1994a) Tucci Himalayan Archives Report, 2: The 1991 Expedition to Himachal
Pradesh. East and West, 44 (1), 13-82.
Klimburg-Salter, D. E. (1994b) A decorated Prajnaparamita manuscript from Poo. Orientations, 25 (6), 54-60.
Klimburg-Salter, D. 3. (1997) Tabo, a lamp for the kingdom. Early Indo-Tibetan Buddhist art in the western
Himalaya, Milan, Skira editore.
Klimburg-Salter, D. E. (1999/2000) The Buddhist art of Gujarat: On Târanātha's Old Western Indian Style. Silk
Road Art and Archaeology, eds. K. Tanabe, E. Errington and O. Bopearachchi, Paris, Vol. 6, 253-267.
Klimburg-Salter, D. E. (forthcoming) The Rang-rig-rtse temple, Charang.
Klimburg-Salter, D. E. (in print) The Ribba temple. A story.
Luczanits, C. (1996) Early Buddhist Wood Carvings from Himachal Pradesh. Orientations, 27 (6), 67-75.
Luczanits, C. (1998) Early Buddhist clay sculpture in the Western Himalaya (late 10th to early 13th
centuries), Ph.D. thesis, Vienna University.
de Mallmann, M.-T. (1986) Introduction à l'iconographie du Tantrisme Bouddhique, Paris, Adrien
Maisonneuve.
Naudou, J. (1968) Les Bouddhistes kasmiriens au moyen age, Paris, Annales du Musée Guimet.
Pal, P. (1975) Bronzes of Kashmir, Graz, Akademische Druck-und Verlagsanstalt.
Petech, L. (1997) Western Tibet: historical introduction. In: D. E. Klimburg-Salter, Tabo, a lamp for the
kingdom. Early Indo-Tibetan Buddhist art in the western Himalaya, Milan, Skira editore, 229-55.
Reedy, C. L. (1997) Himalayan bronzes: technology, style, and choices, Newark, University of Delaware Press.
Rhie, M. M. (1999) Tibetan painting styles, sources, and schools. Worlds of transformation. Tibetan art of
Wisdom and Compassion, eds. M. M. Rhie and R. A. F. Thurman, New York, Tibet House New York
in association with The Shelly and Donald Rubin Foundation and Harry N. Abrams, 45-74.
Sanan, D. and Swadi, D. (1998) Exploring Kinnaur and Spiti in the Trans-Himalaya, New Delhi.
Singer, J. C. and S. M. Kossak (eds.) (1998) Sacred visions. Early paintings from Central Tibet, New York.
Singh, A. K. (1997) Rangrig rtse: An early Buddhist temple in Kinnaur - Western Himalayas. Proceedings
of the 7th Seminar of the International Association for Tibetan Studies, Graz 1995, eds. H. Krasser et
al., Vienna, Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 883-890.
Stein, M. A. (1900). Kalhana's Rājatarangini, a chronicle of the kings of Kašmir, 2 vols, London, Constable
& Co. (repr. Delhi 1989).
Tucci, G. (1933) Indo-Tibetica II. Rin C'en Bran Po e la rinascita del Buddhismo nel Tibet intorno al
mille, Rome.
Tucci, G (1949) Tibetan painted scrolls, 3 vols, Roma, La Libreria dello Stato.
Vitali, R. (1996) The kingdoms of Gu-ge Pu-hrang according to the mNga'.ris rGyal.rabs by Gu.ge
mkhan.chen Ngag.dbang grags.pa, Dharamsala, Tho.ling gtsug.lag.khang lo.gcig.stong 'khor.ba'i
rjes.dran.mdzad sgo'i go.sgrig tshogs.chung Publishers.



Kha-che lugs and The Wood Sculptures from Charang
147
Illustrations
INDIAN HIMALAYA
REGION
Towa
Map 1: Indian Himalaya (after Klimburg-Salter 1997: 22)
KINNER KAILASH PARIKRAMA
Map 2: Kinner Kailash parikrama (after Sanan and Swadi 1998: 278)



148
Deborah Klimburg-Salter
Map 3: Upper Kinnaur, Spiti, Rong-chung (after Cunningham 1854)
Fig. 1: Sugatisandarsana Lokeſvara, Sri Pratap Singh Museum
(D. Klimburg-Salter 1977, WHAV Vienna)



Kha-che lugs and The Wood Sculptures from Charang
149
Fig. 2: Buddha, The Cleveland Museum of Art
(after Pal 1975: fig. 26)
Fig. 3: Crowned Buddha, The Asia Society:
The Mr. and Mrs. John D. Rockefeller 3rd Collection
Fig. 4: Site plan Rang-rig-rtse monastery, Charang, upper Kinnaur
(J. Harrison and M. Falser, WHAV Vienna)



150
Deborah Klimburg-Salter
Fig. 5: Buddha, Rang-rig-rtse monastery, Charang,
upper Kinnaur
(D. Klimburg-Salter 1998, WHAV Vienna)
Fig. 6: Female goddess, Rang-rig-rtse monastery,
Charang, upper Kinnaur
(D. Klimburg-Salter 1998, WHAV Vienna)
Fig. 7: Vajrasattva, Rang-rig-rtse monastery,
Charang, upper Kinnaur
(D. Klimburg-Salter 1998, WHAV Vienna)
Fig. 8: Bodhisattva, Rang-rig-rtse monastery,
Charang, upper Kinnaur
(D. Klimburg-Salter 1998, WHAV Vienna)



Kha-che lugs and The Wood Sculptures from Charang
151
Fig. 9: Maitreya, Rang-rig-rtse monastery, Charang,
upper Kinnaur
(D. Klimburg-Salter 1998, WHAV Vienna)
Fig. 10: Maitreya, Rang-rig-rtse monastery, Charang,
upper Kinnaur
(D. Klimburg-Salter 1998, WHAV Vienna)
Fig. 11: Lokeśvara, Rang-rig-rtse monastery,
Charang, upper Kinnaur
(D. Klimburg-Salter 1998, WHAV Vienna)



Deborah Klimburg-Salter
Fig. 12: Lokeśvara, Rang-rig-rtse monastery,
Charang, upper Kinnaur
(D. Klimburg-Salter 1998, WHAV Vienna)
Fig. 13: Buddha, Rang-rig-rtse monastery,
Charang, upper Kinnaur
(D. Klimburg-Salter 1998, WHAV Vienna)



DID BUDDHA MEAN TO TEACH TANTRAS?
Dan Martin
(Jerusalem)
Very Big Questions are usually avoided in academic philology. There are excellent reasons for this well-
known fact. The desire not to step on the toes, and thereby perhaps provoke the wrath, of colleagues who
have different points of approach to the broader issues must be high on the list, but there is also the
possibility Big Questions might brush aside or violate the details our more careful scholars tend to value
above all else, as if inspired by William Blake's "For every minute particular is holy." When I was made
privy to the plot to spring a surprise volume on E. Gene Smith, my first impulse, given the shortness of the
notice, was to transform a long footnote from my current literary research into a short paper made denser,
rather than clarified, with a lot of footnotes and bibliographical references. I soon had second thoughts about
it. I thought, "Why not offer something large and problematic, even controversial? Certainly E. Gene Smith
has hugely generous spirit which can easily accommodate arguments with which he may or may not agree.
He deserves something of more consequence." That is why I decided to go back to work on this long paper,
more than ten years in the making, which I had many times thought to publish, but then held back, for
reasons just given, among still others. Now that "tantra," along with a few other arcane areas like
"Hermeticism," has carved out a small and precarious yet culturally significant place for itself in the
academy, it could be a cause for celebration, or not, depending on what we mean by it, of course, but also
depending on where we intend to go with it.
Introduction: Intention, Ethics, and Dealing with Emotion
The intentions of the Buddhas are deep and difficult to fathom. Buddhist revelations entail not only the
revelation of their oral and written forms of transmission, but the revelation of their meaning to those who
hear or read them. The discussion here is almost entirely limited to textual, literary documents available in
libraries, and obviously makes no claims to momentous revelations of its own. It is very much about
"revelation," in the sense of eruptions and influxes of transcendent truths into our mundane world, but on
the assumption that these "interruptions" have very much to do with the times in which they occur, which
would justify bringing historical insights to bear on the content of revelations even when these revelations
demand other types of insights not of the chronological kinds.
If we were to speak about the tantric elaboration and de-elaboration of Mahāyāna, the first would be
essentially anti-philological, while the second would be a somewhat different philological approach to the
tantras than has been customary. These two superficially contradictory perspectives may hope to find a
common ground.
The first perspective is based on an arguable assumption about what the Buddhist radical might be. We
may seem to play with words, since the word "perspective" presupposes some vantage point as well as a
presumption about fundamentals: What is it that makes Buddhism Buddhism? This is neither rhetorical nor
a question with answers better left unsaid. One of the basic concepts that emerge from my general study of
Tibetan Buddhist culture (although "culture" as a generalized concept may serve here just as well) is that it
is a lived-through process which not only allows for, but frequently encourages a range of perspectives
(= assumptions about what is fundamental). Culture is never the property of a single person with a single
perspective. Shifting and developing perceptions of culture are themselves part of culture. This makes
understanding culture the epistemological equivalent of the mind knowing itself (a knowing agent seeking
1. I thereby think there is here very little likelihood of betraying tantric "secrets" since the material used is published,
and therefore and in that degree "public knowledge." Mantras, initiations, tantric pledges, tantric activities,
substances and the like are often placed under the seal of secrecy (and some reasons for this secrecy are alluded to
in the passage by Sog-bzlog-pa which appear later on in this paper), but these subjects will hardly be touched upon.



154
Dan Martin
to understand a complex of which the knowing agent itself is a contingent part). These comments do
undoubtedly apply to intra-cultural as well as extra-cultural understandings. Buddhism, and particularly
Mahāyāna Buddhism, recognized the potential value of such a broad range of individual approaches that it
often appears laughable when scholars insist that there was, for any time or space, an orthodox doctrinal
position." Sometimes the heat of scholarly insistence on this point (and the use of the very word
"orthodoxy") only succeeds in conveying to us the limitations of their disciplinary approaches. A number of
Buddhist doctrinal "positions," to the extent they may be called such, are positioned at different points in
the process leading to Enlightenment, which means that they are not "ultimately well founded, and were
never meant to be. Ways of thinking, including Buddhist ways of thinking, may be wrapped around deeply
embedded karmic seeds, may be just epiphenomena of an illusory self-concept ("conceited" or "narcissistic"
are words that spring to mind). Philosophical views, however liberal and enlightened they may seem, may
be self-serving in a very deep sense. Abhidharma Buddhism considers afflicted views (Ita-ba nyon-mongs-
can), including views held too rigorously or given priority over other things, to be one of the six main
obstacles to Enlightenment. If there is a Buddhist radical, it has little to do with fundamentalisms of the text-
based kinds and renders the very idea of "philosophy" problematic.
I must first say, before going on to give my preferred answers for this Very Big Question of the
"Buddhist radical[s]," and then justifying them, that I am not in the business of looking for an "original"
Buddhism as such, but for basic factors that account for its distinctive continuity. Such generalized
observations are dangerous, and are more generally assumed than they are openly posed. This makes it all
the more important to pose them openly.
My answers roughly falls into two parts, dividing Buddhism into two not-unconnected levels, those of
devotion and thought. On the level of devotion is Refuge in the Three Jewels, in Buddha[s], Dharma (the
teachings of the Buddha[s]), and the Buddhist Community (pre-eminently the most venerable of the monks
and nuns, but also engaged laypersons or lay renunciates). This devotion is primarily a matter of "conduct,"
acts of devotion through the offering of goods and services, and acts of worship through the devotee's bodily,
verbal and mental powers.
This devotional complex also involves commitment to a particular social ethic, the ten virtues, which
are also divisible into the bodily (1-3), verbal (4-7) and mental (8-10):
1. Renouncing the taking of life.
6. Renouncing harsh speech.
2. Renouncing the taking of things not given. 7. Renouncing gossip
3. Renouncing promiscuous sexual conduct. 8. Renouncing miserliness.
4. Renouncing lying.
9. Renouncing thoughts of harming.
5. Renouncing slander.
10.Renouncing counterproductive perspectives.
These bodily, verbal and mental acts of devotion and ethics find corresponding levels in the objects of
devotion, a theory that was nowhere more highly elaborated than in Tibet. In Mahāyāna, and thence in Tibet,
we find the first object of Refuge, the Buddha[s], trifurcated into Body, Speech and Mind (the second of
these covering the same territory as the second Refuge). Each of these three may be represented by a
"receptacle" (rten), an icon. Body receptacles include images; Speech receptacles - sacred books; Mind
receptacles - stūpas or cairyas, commemorative monuments and reliquaries. These are considered worthy to
receive such acts of devotion as light offerings, circumambulations, prostrations, special rituals, praises,
prayers and aspirations.
2. This is why I have termed this perspective anti-philological. It is also anti-evolutionary. The usual procedure of the
evolutionist philologist is to find traces of an uncharacteristic trend within the wider tradition, claim that it is the
original strand just because it is so much different from the tradition as we know it, and then finally accuse the
tradition of being untrue to its "actual" origins (or, alternatively, they may excise uncharacteristic trends by dubbing
them later interpolations"). This sort of etymologizing scholarship has, for better or worse, a subversive effect, that
may or may not be consciously intended. It is also part of the cultural process, "Original Buddhism" is, in any case,
too far removed from the period of focus of this study to be very relevant



Did Buddha Mean to Teach Tantras?
155
It may well be objected that there are historical developments in the cult of the Buddha image, for
instance, which surely didn't exist in the beginning, and in various devotional practices, and I by no means
intend to deny change. That would be very un-Buddhist indeed. I am arguing for a continuum of devotion
and devotional practice as an inextricable part of Buddhism the religion, and also that Buddhism always
involves the subordination (even when not "absolute") of the believer's bodily conduct, verbalizations and
thought to the bodily, verbal and mental levels pertaining to Buddhaſ-s/-hood). Insofar as some modernizing
Buddhists and buddhicizing Moderns have denied this component, insisting on a purely rational "Buddhism
of the head, they have been, on the whole, anti-traditional, placing themselves off to the margins of the
present discussion.
While the second "non-development," that of thought, is usually treated as a separate topic, it may also
be seen as a further form of subordination to Buddha-thought, and of the tenth ethical virtue, renouncing
perspectives counterproductive to Buddhist goals. I have attempted to trace this historical non-development
in a separate work entitled "Illusion Web - Locating the Guhyagarbha Tantra in Buddhist Intellectual
History." an ironic title, since the web/palace imagery, providing visualizable cues to the nature of the
Buddha's enlightened vision (called variously relativity, interdependently originating, realm of dharmas,
voidness), seems to be unlocalizable in the history of Buddhism, since it shows up at every turn, or "shines
everywhere" so to speak. The web/palace as objective experience (Enlightenment) pertaining to an
experiencing subject (Enlightened One) is a dualism rendered entirely problematic in the higher meditative
concentrations (meditation being another indispensable even if not universally practiced component of
Buddhism) and finally overcome in the non-duality of the actual experiencing of Enlightenment where even
the word "experience" is problematic, only to reappear out of compassion for those who still need help in
finding and pursuing the Path. The view of phenomenon as interdependently originating, having neither a
first cause nor any simple or singular lines of causation, is a Buddhist constant which, I believe, comes prior
to Buddhist philosophical construction (meditative experience of the same by someone being the real
priority). It is assumed, and at the same time is most generally assumed to be far beyond ordinary human
understanding; hence faith and devotion, even on the "intellectual" level, are not far to follow.
Buddhist tantra, more correctly termed Vajrayāna, is a theatrical elaboration of these same basic
elements which, being Buddhist, it presumes. This elaboration is meant to effect an active engagement of
the bodily, verbal and mental powers in the replication or approximation (perhaps a "dramatic pre-
enactment") of the Enlightened One's Body, Speech and Mind as an expedient in their actualization. On the
ritual/contemplative level, this means powerful gestures [body], powerful words (speech), and powerful
thoughts (mind). On the yogic level it is physical posture, mantra repetition and mental yoga (visualization,
concentration and various other meditation practices), all of it summed up for us in the Sanskrit word
sādhana. A lot of ink (or its verbal equivalent) has been spilled by learned professors about what the defining
characteristic of tantra might be. As far as Buddhist tantra is concerned (and arguably Hindu tantra as well),
it is the employment of sadhana that makes tantra. In other words, it isn't an academic category at all, which
makes the professors vaguely dissatisfied or more plainly perplexed.
3. This phrase was borrowed from Dr. Gregory Schopen, whether or not it originated with him. Another now common
way to refer to a similar phenomenon (within a broader context) is "Buddhist modernism," a phrase which evidently
was coined by Alexandra David-Neel, the famous Tibet adventurer and popularizer. "Protestant Buddhism" is a
term being used by Buddhological scholars in a similar if somewhat different sense. Just as Protestants have an
"apostolic" tendency to deny Christian tradition (together, ironically, with the "apostolic succession") and go
straight to a reconstructed point of Christian origins, so "Protestant Buddhism" goes straight for a "primitive
Buddhism" which owes much to their own rationalist mind-sets brought to bear on a field of literary evidence
thoroughly weeded of contrary evidence by applying evolutionist philology. This "Protestant" form of Buddhism,
apparently largely the product of Protestants rather than Catholics, is then ingested and digested by the Buddhist
traditions themselves, contributing to the development of Buddhist modernism."
4. "Shines everywhere" is the meaning of the name of Vairocana, the central of the five Tathagatas.



156
Dan Martin
buric
Although if left unsaid it may not be obvious, the ten virtues are positive counterparts of ten non-virtues,
and these ten non-virtues are motivated by the three or five "poisons," "poison" being a stock metaphor for
passions (the primary negative emotional poles), so much so that its metaphorical usage is rarely even
recognized as being such. The poisonous roots of the non-virtues of mind are most obvious. Miserliness is
motivated by the poison of attachment/desire, thoughts of harming by the poison of aversion/hatred, and
counterproductive perspectives by the poison of stupidity/indifference? The correspondences for body and
speech non-virtues may be a little less obvious, but understandable with slight reflection. Predominance of
non-virtues motivated by a particular poison lead to rebirth in a particular (and particularly undesirable) realm
of existence, as the first Karma-pa Dus-gsum-mkhyen-pa said in a public talk:
In order to avoid the sufferings of hell realms, it is necessary to avoid the reasons (for being born
in them). Therefore it is very important not to perform those of the ten nonvirtues which are done
mainly out of aversion/hatred, even though your life is at stake. When aversion/hatred is not
abandoned, in the case of ordinary Refuge takers (Buddhists), they lack the four principles of
cultivating virtue [1. Not to scold when scolded. 2. Not to return anger for anger. 3. Not to uncover
the faults of one who uncovers one's faults. 4. Not to strike back]. In the case of Bodhisattvas, they
must cultivate love because all sentient beings have been their mothers, and love and
aversion/hatred cannot live together in the same place, while it is not difficult to consume the
virtues of a thousand aeons (in a moment of anger). In the case of tantrics, they must imagine all
beings of the biological universe as male and female deities. When anger is engendered toward
them there is no way to encounter the visualized deity.' It might just be possible to abandon
aversion/hatred [entirely), but even when a "contemplative absorption of great love" is spoken of,
it will be understood to mean that since the hatred has just dug in deeper it does not manifest itself.
The Karma-pa continues his analysis in the same vein with the other passions, but it is most important for the
following discussions to keep in mind the deep and unmanifest passions. The final sentence shows that the
sophisticated Buddhist was not to be satisfied with the trances of universal love and cosmic unity, because
even in the midst of them there might lurk passions "sleeping in concealment" (bag la nyal-ba, or bag-nyal),
or "hidden formations" (bag-chags/vāsana). This sort of religiously-practical depth psychology was already
5. See HOLT, Discipline, especially chapter five, "The Structure of Disciplined Actions," for evidence and arguments
for the passionate etiology of non-virtues according to vinaya texts. The three poisons are sometimes in Mahāyāna
and usually in Vajrayāna increased to five by the addition of greed/envy and pride/slander. They may be said to
cover basically the same moral/motivational territory, the same all-too-human obsessions, as the "minute-to-
multiplied afflictive mental states" (nyon-rmongs phra-rgyas) or the "root afflictions" (rtsa-ba'i nyon-rmongs) of
the Abhidharma works (but in the Abhidharmakośa one does not detect any use of the "poison" metaphor).
6. Demerits of mind override those of body and speech, since the latter always involve the mental.
7. Indifference in the negative sense, to be carefully distinguished from the positive virtue of equanimity
(upeksha/btang-snyoms), a form of tolerance which involves both a patient, longsuffering attitude ("turning the
other cheek") and especially an absence of prejudice. Equanimity is one of the Four Immeasurables (almost always
found at the beginnings of tantric ritual meditations, it should be noted), and therefore goes nicely together with
love, compassion and rejoicing in the happiness and accomplishments of others.
8. The context is a recorded public teaching (tshogs chos) by Dus-gsum-mkhyen-pa. See KARMA-PA I, Selected
Writings, vol. 1. pp. 270.5-271.5.
9. This Tibetan term, while essentially untranslatable, has often been translated as "god" or "deity." In most contexts,
lha does not mean "deity" as an entity which exists in its own right and brings other things into existence; to the
contrary, it means an entity that exists only as a mental projection "created by the devotee (a yi-dam-gyi lha, called
such because it epitomizes the sādhakala's high aspiration for enlightenment). Also called lha are certain Hindu
"deities" (deva) such as Indra and Brahma, as well as local Tibetan "lords of the soil" (sa-bdag). Lha may be both
worldly Cig-rten-pa) and trans-worldly (jig-rten las 'das-pa). Lha is also frequently used as a respectful epithet for
rulers and for the recently deceased. The feminine form is tha mo.
10. Note that since this is a work by a student of Tibet, rather than of India, Tibetan terms are generally given priority
over Indic ones; Sanskrit terms are occasionally supplied only in favor of those who might find them more
meaningful



Did Buddha Mean to Teach 'Tantras?
157
present in some sūtras; witness, for example, the "deeply hidden pains" in the Gandavyäha. One might think
we were preparing to embark on a discourse on psychoanalytical theory, but that is not our aim here.
According to Theravada teachings even to this day, the main method of dealing with emotional states
is to give up the negative and take up the positive. Following are the "Four Perfect Abandonings" (yang-
dag par spong-ba bzhi) which are four among the thirty-seven factors of Enlightenment. Rather than
"abandonings" (although this is the understanding of the term in Sanskrit and Tibetan sources), the Pali may
more correctly be understood as "endeavours":
1. Avoiding (negative mental states).
3. Developing (positive mental states)
2. Overcoming (negative mental states). 4. Maintaining (positive mental states).
The following Tibetan scheme may be overly simplistic. It isn't especially clear which school is intended by
the Lesser Vehicle. Certainly Theravāda teachers today are likely to say that avoidance, while effective in
some degree, is at some point insufficient, and go on to recommend some form of transformation." Great
Completedness (Rdzogs-chen) texts, both Rnying-ma-pa and Bon, recommend a three-fold set of
possibilities for dealing with negative mental or emotional states.
Lesser Vehicle (Hinayāna):
A. Abandoning/avoiding (spong-ba).
Great Vehicle (Mahāyāna):
B. Transformation (bsgyur-ba)
(a) Bodhisattva transformation, primarily by "antidotes" (gnyen-po), and
(b) Transformation through Vajrayāna methods, which might be described as "reversals" (log-pa,
bzlog.pa) or "tantric elaborations."
C. Releasing/disentangling (grol-ba), which might also be understood as "tantric de elaboration," as
advocated in Great Completedness of Rnying-ma and Bon Schools or, in the New Schools, in Great
Seal (Mahamudrā).12 The naive view sees this releasing as "giving free rein" to the negative
emotions, although the Tibetan term implies a disentanglement, which, I would further suggest,
means a freeing up of the space they usually would occupy.
Transformation might all along have been implicit in the practice of abandoning, just as releasing might have
been implicit in the practice of transformation. Rather than ascribing newness of one over the other, as if the
"later" supplanted the "earlier," what we see here may just be a more sophisticated program, with different
approaches to negative emotions made available as needed to persons at different stages of development.
Vajrayāna poetics and/or hermeneutics
Vajrayāna is theater. It is a theater with a very Buddhist audience in mind, one of the givens that too often
escapes scholars, and their theories on tantra and its development have, on the whole, denied or ignored this.
The following discussion of literary critical development of Buddhist tantra does not claim to displace or
belittle those other theories, rather to supply a perspective which I have found too often absent but which is,
I think, essential. We should start in medias res.
Tragedy, then, is a representation of an action that is worth serious attention, complete in itself, and
of some amplitude; in language enriched by a variety of artistic devices appropriate to the several
parts of the play: presented in the form of action, not narration; by means of pity and fear bringing
about the purgation of such emotions (Aristotle, Ars Poetica, chapter 6)."
Aristotle goes on to recommend (in chapter fourteen), the killing of those near and dear as the most effective
way of arousing pity and fear in the audience.
11. See Chapter Two of GETHIN, Buddhist Path.
12. For English-language sources, from Rnying-ma-pa perspective, we could recommend NAMKHAI NORBU, Rigbai
Kujyug and Dzog Chen.
13. Cited according to the translation of DORSCH, Classical Literary Criticism, pp. 38-39.



158
Dan Martin
The Aristotelian concept of catharsis has been discussed endlessly. My only reason for bringing it up
is to point to what I see as a parallel concept in tantric "drama."
Against Plato's objection to poetry on the grounds that it excites the emotions, which ought to be
kept under control, Aristotle, while agreeing that it does indeed excite the emotions, claims that in
doing so it releases them, and hence has the effect of reducing them."
I do not think that catharsis for Aristotle was ever limited in meaning to a lightheaded aftereffect of seeing
an engaging drama, as some latter-day interpreters would have it; it was an adjunct process (mimêsis), a
simultaneous production, since if the tragedy is to be effective, it must keep us in its grasp, making us co-
participants." Indian dramatic theorists, along with Indian poetic and artistic theories in general, differ from
Aristotle primarily in the number of emotions - for him, two, pity and fear; for them eight, nine or ten - that
drama may unleash in its audience to good effect. These are the rasa (nyams).
1. Erotic/enticing (shrngāra / sgeg-pa).
6. Laughable/humorous (häsya/bzhad-gad).
2. Wrathful/aggressive (raudra/drag-shu!). 7. Marvelous/astounding (adbhuta/rmad-byung).
3. Heroic/athletic (vira/dpa'-bo).
8. Frightening/terrifying (bhayānaka/ jigs-rung),
4. Compassionate/pitiable (karunā/snying-rje). 9. Peaceful/quieting (śānta/zhi-ba).
5. Ugly/revolting (bibhatsa/mi-sdug-pa).
Some Indian architectural manuals advise that pictures representing all nine of these emotions could be
displayed in palaces or temples, but not in individual homes, even if this had become the fashion. They
suggest that people display only pictures for erotic, ludic, and pacific emotions in the home. There are
many references to these in Indian and Tibetan tantric literature, as, for example in the Hevajra Tantra.
The European dramatic "unities" of action time and place also bear some similarity to the five "unities"
of a tantra. These "unities," called phun-sum-tshogs-pa, or, in Sanskrit, sampanna (with connotations of
totality, wholeness, completeness and perfection), are most frequently the unities of Teacher, Place,
Teaching, Time and Audience (capitalized because they are very common words used in a special way, being
in some sense hypostasized). These "unities" were considered critical for correct interpretation of tantras
because they are interdependent. Hence the nature of the Teachings, as well as their manner of presentation,
is largely dependent on the other four. Together, all five form a larger unity which delineates the entirety of
the realm of discourse (within which the discourse itself is only one interdependent component). Hence they
are crucial to traditional tantra exegesis. It is not sufficient to say "the Buddha said." One must ask "in what
setting?" and "to whom?" and even "by what form of Buddha?" In brief, Buddhist theories of interdependent
causation are self-consciously allowed to reflect back on Buddhist views about the production of Buddhist
scriptures themselves, a point that has on the whole escaped the reflections of recent Buddhologists, but
certainly requires more serious consideration.
Now, in an attempt to sum up the discussion thus far, we must say that ritual actions and meditative
visualizations, rooted as they are in Buddhist forms of devotion, are believed to link with something basic
about human beings and about Buddha(-hood) as well, otherwise there is no justification for their reputed
power to lead toward Buddhist Enlightenment. The "future" Buddhist goal is taken as a "present"
groundwork. This linkage is denoted by sahaja (Ihan-skyes or lhan-cig skyes-pa), which P. Kvaeme, after
14. DORSCH, Classical Literary Criticism, p. 17.
15. Aristotle in the Poetics is primarily concerned with mimêsis on the level of artistic production, but he does not
neglect audience response. Aristotle's use of this word does not always mean simply "imitation," but something
close to assistance in accomplishing something." See DORSCH, Classical Literary Criticism, p. 26.
16. See HABERMAN. Acting (especially chapter 2: "Religion and Drama in South Asia," pp. 12-29), for a very
insightful discussion of the linkage between religious and dramatic actions in India, including some suggestive
remarks about the similarities and differences between classical Greek and Indian dramatic theories, the rasas and
so forth
17. BOSE, Principles, p. 82
18. SNELLGROVE, Hevajra Tantra, vol. 1. p. 111.



Did Buddha Mean to Teach Tantras?
159
careful consideration, has translated as the "simultaneously-arisen," a translation which is basically sound,
but which I would prefer to modify somewhat to "simultaneously (or parallelly) produced" when it serves
as an adjective, and "parallel production" when (or if) it is used as a noun.20 There is a partially analogous
term in the poetics of Dandin, sahokri (saha-ukti), which means "paralleled expression in which disparate
objects are made to undergo, or undertake for poetic ends, the same actions at the same time. This allows an
entire complex of related or interacting objects, thoughts, and so forth, to be linked with another such
complex. Another way of stating the foregoing is to say that the drama of ritual action and visualization in
tantra engages the participant through the passions in order to transform (bsgyur) and/or release (grol) them,
and it accomplishes this, at least in part, by methods held in common with literary, visual and dramatic art,
and the tantras themselves are quite self-conscious of this. Given the fact that literary criticism of the
alamkārika and tantra flourished in India during the same centuries, it would be more remarkable if this were
not the case.
Tantras and the literary productions of the alamkārika share a certain similar level of sophistication,
have a similar sense of elitism. They frankly do not care whether or not they will be understood by the non-
initiate. If people are bewildered or shocked, so much the better for them. That is no concern of the high
literary aesthete or of the tantric initiate. Neither, on the other hand, would either of these elitists bother to
express themselves if there were no fellow initiates who could appreciate their work. But there is a
difference in that the ends are different. While the littérateur aims for pleasing and striking, but in any case
skillfully accomplished, effect (and hence aggrandizement by their peers), the tantric aims ultimately for
Buddhist Enlightenment.21 Buddhism, denying any substantive continuity or inherent identity to the "self."
goes on to play in tantra with the concept of the self, with the self-image, through imagination, through
imagination programs with close analogies to birth and death processes. All Buddhism uses "imagination,"
since the goals of Nirvāṇa, etc., have to be imagined until they are realized. In this Buddhist context,
imagination means goal-oriented visualization (dmigs-pa means both visualization and intentness on an
objective). Still, with a sense of catholicity that it shares with and develops on the basis of) the major
Mahāyāna sūtras, tantra would have no problem in accepting the modus operandi of the littérateur as
"means" (upāya). The tantric scriptures are, after all, literature. Why then should they not have literary aims
as well?
Although apparently little appreciated by others, the importance of literary studies for Buddhist studies
was recognized by some Tibetan scholars, as for example, Bod Mkhas-pa Mi-pham-dge-legs-rnam-rgyal:
Poetic science is a supremely valued subject for study. The scriptures on inner science [i.e.,
Buddhism) are themselves in the form of poetry. All the other sciences use it as well. Therefore it
is as important as the iris of the eye for seeing all knowables.22
Tāranātha declares that, while some tantras use the "four methods" of interpretation, all of them employ the
"six ends" (already discussed above).2Sa-skya Pandi-ta says that statements like "Father and mother are to
be killed" that appear in some of the sūtras, tantras and poetic treatises are "figurative" or "non-literal" (sgra
ji-bzhin ma yin-pa).24
"Jam-dpal-dgyes-pa” says,
19. See KVAERNE, "On the Concept" and KVAERNE, Anthology, pp. 61-64.
20. KVAERNE, Anthology. p. 62, doubts that Buddhist tantras ever use the term as a noun except as shorthand for
longer expressions. I have not been able to make up my mind on this point, but prefer to give Kvaerne the benefit
of any doubt. In the Tibetan language itself the question is largely irrelevant, since adjectives, as in many languages,
may be employed as nouns (we know they are doing this when there isn't any noun nearby for it to qualify).
21. Not just magical feats, since, in the absence of Buddhist goals, we could hardly call it Buddhism, not that Buddhist
tantra denies to those who desire them the pursuit of magical feats; it refuses to stop at them. See the discrission of
magic and magical motivations by Sog-bzlog-pa to follow.
22. MI-PHAM-DGE-LEGS-RNAM-RGYAL, Snyan-ngag-gi Bstan-bcos, p. 18.
23. TARANĀTHA, Collected Works, vol. 13, p. 427.5.
24. See SA-SKYA PANDI-TA, Mkhas-pa Jug-pa'i Sgo, p. 108.



160
Dan Martino
The profound Vajrayāna as well
is sealed with the "six ends" and the "four methods."
It has been set down with the stainless reasoning
that accompanies the oral precepts of the lineages.
What Sog-bzlog-pa says about it
Sog-bzlog-pa has a long but especially revealing discussion of the rhetorical aims of the tantras and the
necessity for thetorically informed interpretation.26 He begins with two suggestive quotes from Buddhist
treatises, then gives four alternative positions which he finds unsatisfactory, and finally gives his own
explanation, supporting it with scriptural as well as commentarial citations:
It says in the Madhyamakahrdayakärika:27
In order to point to non-self and the like, and to point to the greatness of the Three Precious, (the
Buddha taught] in accordance with the student's Vehicle.
The Ācārya Abhaya said in his Munimatālamkāra:28
"The Mahāyānists whose every deed is a personification of compassion and who teach stainless
Total Knowledge - what sort of person with a mind would condemn them? Only one who does not
really know faults and qualities or who considers qualities to be faults or who hates those who have
qualities would condemn the Great Vehicle."29
Some say, "Even if the Mahāyāna Secret Mantra literature (might have been taught by yakşas, rakṣasas,
and the like, it could not have been) preached by the Tathāgata because it teaches things contradictory to
the way of Dharma preached by the Victor such as taking life and taking what was not offered."
Some commentators on the Parisodhana Tantra say, "These explanations about sexual conduct were
done as a favor to the deities of great desire such as Lord of the Dance (Nateshvara). If this were not so,
there would be some contradictions in the precious holy Dharma preached from the mouth of one Tathāgata.
[This would demonstrate) unskillful means. These are like the words of a madman, since doubts will prevent
beings from being liberated."
Some early Tibetans have said, "While surely preached by the Tathāgata, such things as taking life,
taking what was not offered, wrong sexual relations, and telling lies have been taken literally, and this
creates wrong practices in the profound way of secret mantra."
Some others have said, "All the discourses of Buddha are exclusively of the uncompromisingly
presented (nges-don) sort. Otherwise the Bhagavan would tell lies."
All these statements display a lack of understanding. They have not realized that the Bhagavan made
statements that were intentional,30 flexibly-intentional, literal, metaphorical, adjusted, and
uncompromisingly presented. He did this in order to lead some aspirants (to the Path) and in order to prevent
others from using them on their own in the absence of a master.
25. Ten folio block print in personal possession entitled Don Rnam-par Nges-pa Shes-rab Ral-gri (folio 7 verso, line 4).
26. SOG-BZLOG-PA, Collected Writings, vol. 1. pp. 555 ff. Compare discussion in SANGS-RGYAS-RDO-RJE,
Responses, p. 460.5 ff., which will be referred to in following notes, it is quite similar, but sometimes supplies
additional explanations.
27. Tibetan title: Du-ma Snying-po by Bhavya, translated into Tibetan by Atisha and Tshul-khrims-rgyal-ba (TOH 3855).
28. TOH, no. 3903. Tibetan title: Thub-pa'i Dgongs Rgyan. This work was composed in the thirtieth year of king
Rāmapala, which would place its composition in about 1130 CE. It was translated by the author himself at Nalanda
in collaboration with the Tibetan translator of Spyong-sho (=Dpang-sho), Gsal-ba-grags. The author is known in
Tibetan as 'Jigs-med-'byung-gnas-sbas-pa (i.e., Abhayākaragupta).
29. This quote is entirely lacking in the version in SOG-BZLOG-PA, Collected Writings, and has been supplied from
SOG-BZLOG-PA. sung Thorbu (p. 197). This latter version has been consulted, and sometimes followed, in the
following translation
30. The translation intentional" for dgongs-pa (abhiprāya) is perhaps not adequate. See the discussion in BROIDO,
"Abhipraya and Implication in Tibetan Linguistics." I think it is important to note here that what I take to be



Did Buddha Mean to Teach Tantras?
161
There are four types of statements intended to be flexible.
In order to induct some aspirants into the perfect Path, he made such statements as those about
spontaneously generated sentient beings and form [and other skandhas) as existing. These are flexibly-
intentional statements (adjusted for the sake of) inducement. With respect to the three substantialities2
[generalized concept substantiality, extrinsically determined substantiality, substantiality thoroughly
established in its own right], he made statements about the non-existence of all dharmas, about them being
like a mirage, or being like space. Such statements are philosophically flexibly-intentional statements. As a
way of neutralizing such things as condemnations of the Buddha, he made statements such as those about
the Supreme Vehicle. These are called antidotal flexibly-intentional statements. On account of their
profound import, he changed the letter of his statements. Such statements are transmuted flexibly-intentional
statements.4
As the Sūtrālankāra's says,
There are four ways of flexibly-intentional statements.
One is [adjusted) for hearers, one for substantialities,
one for converting faults,
and one for the profundity of the utterances themselves.
As examples of antidotal flexibly-intentional statements, the Buddha said, "I myself in those times became
the Buddha Vipaśvi (Rnam-par-gzigs)." In this way he meant to point out the sameness of Dharmakāya.
[This is the intention of indicating sameness.)
Also, "If you serve Buddhas as many as the sands of the Ganges, you will hear these teachings." In such
statements he had another purpose in mind (besides the plainly obvious one).
something working on the level of literary analysis Broido carries onto the very high and perplexing levels of
linguistic philosophy. I have no wish or present need to follow his trail. I assume that this discussion by Sog-bzlog-
pa is telling us the same general types of things that a Christian theologian might say about the literality of a
scriptural passage, or that a literary critic might say in an effort to divine the significance of a novel. Still, I would
not deny that the discussion might have some extrinsic interest or implications for linguistic philosophy. I would
especially recommend BROIDO, "Killing," to anyone who would like to further pursue the issues of tantra
interpretation.
31. These statements are specifically aimed at Hearers (Śrävaka), according to SANGS-RGYAS-RDO-RJE (Responses,
p. 461.1), who are unable to comprehend teachings about "form empty of form" (gzugs gzugs-kyis stong-pa).
32. "Substantiality" (ngo-bo-nyid) in a Buddhist context is synonymous with voidness. Buddhist philosophy is
generally counter to materialist and essentialist positions (see, for example, the "knows the absence of essence as
essence" in a following quote), and the fact that they employ the terms of those positions should not be allowed to
obscure the very different way they are used in Buddhist writings. This is a quite consistent Buddhist practice, and
should not be mistaken as anything so trivial as "playing with words."
33. SANGS-RGYAS-RDO-RJE (Responses, p. 461) supplies the example (which he also gives for intention of
indicating sameness"), "I myself became in those times the Buddha Vipasvi." According to him, this was said in
order to neutralize the doubts of those who might think that Säkyamuni was inferior to other Buddhas just because
he lived in an impure environment and had a shorter lifespan than the earlier ones.
34. SANGS-RGYAS-RDO-RJE (Responses, p. 461.6) explains transmuted flexibly-intentioned statements" by saying
that the Buddha spoke in a transformed way in order to avoid the censure of some who might think that the
particular teaching is too lofty, and therefore not as good for them as other teachings.
35. This is the famous Mahayanasitralamkūra by Maitreya. Usually agreed to be a fourth-century text, it was translated
into Tibetan by Dpal-brtsegs with the Indian scholar Sākyasimha (along with a commentary on it). This appears to
be the most important Indian treatise for the transmission into Tibet of this particular method of explaining
Mahāyāna hermeneutics.
36. For some reason, Sog-bzlog pa does not cite the verse from the Sarralamkūra that actually lists the four types of
flexibly-intentioned statements. This verse has therefore been supplied from SANGS-RGYAS-RDO-RJE, Responses.
p. 460.5. For another, different, citation of this latter passage, see DPA-BO, Mkhas-pal Dga'ston (1986), p. 542.
37. The bracketed statement is taken from SANGS-RGYAS-RDO RJE, Responses, p. 460.1.



162
Dan Martin
"Those who have made merit and aspirations for Sukhāvati will take birth there." Such statements have
a different time-frame in mind [than what seems to be implied). 18
"Generosity is inferior, while discipline is supreme." This was expressed with the inclinations of the
(particular) person in mind, the textual traditions and reasoning determining the course of the words and
meaning in the preceding cases).
When [the Buddha) was explaining things so that the course of words and meanings was not determined
by authorities (precedents) and reasonings, but indicating directly the teachings with just the [right]
expression, this is what is meant by] "literal." To give an example,
You should not kill living beings.
Neither should you take what was not given.
If you want accomplishments, you will not engage
in lies or lustful practices.39
Indicating things through "reversals" (snrel-gzhi) of words and meanings, the course of which was
determined by authorities and reasonings are the "non-literal" (metaphorical) expressions.
Statements in which all dharmas are demonstrated as voidness are "uncompromisingly presented,"
while those which are aimed at sentient beings, personalities and humans are "adjusted presentations."
The Samādhirāja" says,
Among the Teachings of the Sugata Teacher we must recognize
a special category of sutra sets that are "uncompromisingly presented."
All those scriptures in which sentient beings, personalities and humans are the ones being taught
must be recognized as "adjusted presentations."
This subject is treated in detail in the Samdhinirmocana, 42 to which the reader is referred.
While the Bhagavan's advice was to renounce killing, yet there are those potential Buddhists who find
this renunciation intimidating or threatening. For [Buddhist teachings) are not meant exclusively for
qualified persons with minds thoroughly purified with discipline and contemplative absorption, but even
those who have not renounced killing are suitable for induction into this holy Vehicle." Oblivious to the
foregoing, they hear agreeable words which induce them to take Refuge in the Three Precious, generate
the Thought of Enlightenment and so on. Following their induction, and at least by the time they are
intimidated by the direct vision of the perfect Path's significance, they will definitely turn away from killing
and so forth. [The statements) serve rather to turn [their propensities for killing and so forth) into a basis for
their gradual induction
38. SANGS-RGYAS-RDO-RJE (p. 460.3), gives a different example here: "By holding (remembering) the name of
Tathāgata Rin-chen-zla-'od, you are Enlightened."
39. A possible source for the quote is the Sarvadurgari Tantra (SKORUPSKI, Sarvadurgati, p. 102).
40. Snrel-zhi is an unusual word used in older Tibetan translations (BLANG, P. 287.6.) which later became nearly
obsolete. It is used in a citation from the Avatantsakasūtra collection (a sutra which, by the way, was never entirely
made to conform to the New Translations standards) found in KONG-SPRUL, Shes-bya Kun Khyab, vol. I, p.
176.13. It means "oblique, transverse" (phrel) or "reversed, transposed" (logs). It may also mean to bypass steps
or states that would ordinarily be considered indispensable (thod-rgal-ba), or to switch the order of those steps
around ('chol-ba). The corresponding Sanskrit word must be vyutyaya, or vyatyasta.
41. TOH. no. 127.
42. See the recent books on the subject of this sitra by John Powers.
43. One could cite here the passage from the Suvikrāntacinta Devaputra Parip/ccha Sutra (TOG PALACE, vol. 69, p.
814.3);
When one bears with the anger, killing, and bondage of all sentient beings
and does not reject those sentient beings,
this is the perfection of Method.
44. Words of pleasing aesthetic impact" (yamis dga'-ba'i fshig). This passage underlines the strategic use of
misunderstanding that was alluded to earlier.



Did Buddha Mean to Teach Tantras?
163
"Statements about killing and so forth are not intended literally, but elastically." This the Great
Translator Rin-chen-bzang-po has explained in detail using the Dgongs-pa Lung-ston45 Tantra, the Rdo-rje
Rtse-mo, the De-nyid Bsdus-pa (Tattvasamgraha), and other scriptures.
Since these things are dependent on the oral precepts of the lama, the purposes are concealed, the words
altered, and statements such as those on killing have been made.
Ācārya Śäkyamitra says in his Kosalalankära."
Why, it may be asked, are such statements as this made by Buddha in elastic expressions?
It is in order to prevent unauthorized use of mantras by those who happen to see the volumes.
Without the oral precepts of the teacher, they must never attain achievements.
The Sgron-ma Gsal-ba" says, "Intending that they must not be used without a teacher, in order to
indicate particular activities in words that violate (the norms of ordinary) worldlings, the Buddha said such
things as “All sentient beings are to be killed," "enjoy telling lies," "covet the property of others," and
"always act on your desires."
Taking "killing" literally is great among the sins that are grave by their very nature (rang-bzhin-gyi kha-
na-ma-tho-ba), and was preached to be the most important cause of being reborn in lower realms. Because
they would violate the teachings of the Buddha, statements on "killing" are not to be taken literally
For further explanation, this quote from the Sarvarahasya Tantra, where "killing" is intended to mean
the killing of the self-concept, will serve,
All aspects of all sentient beings
are subsumed by the constituents (dharmas) of your own mind,
If you slay through application of the non-self of dharmas, it is only your
self that will die.
Ācārya Dharmakirti also said, "Statements such as 'If you slay all sentient beings are applicable to Voidness,
meaning utter annihilation," and further,
Performed on the skandhas which have no real substance,
it is done by thoughts which are product of "peaceful abiding" meditations,
Performing this sort of killing
falls within the context of the Supreme Vehicle.
In other cases, "taking life" may be said with the intended meaning of slaying the emotional disturbances,
slaying the discursive thoughts, slaying the views which see substance in momentary aggregations (fig
tshogs la Ita-ba). The ācāryas of the past have explained these things in detail. Likewise, statements on
stealing, wrong sexual practices, and telling lies are not literally intended. The Sandhivyakarana Tantra
says,
Whatever the Total Knowledge belonging to the Completely Enlightened
One may be, it is conceived as a substance
and whoever would rob Him of it must be covering the possessions of others.
One whose purpose is a single objective,
45. TOH. 444. The Dgongs.pa Lung-bstan-pa zhes hya-ba'i Rgyud (Sandhivyakarana Tantra), translated by Rin-chen-
bzang po together with Dharmasribhadra. This is an "explanatory tantra" (bshad rgyud) connected with the
Guyasamāja Tantra.
46. TOH. 480. The Vajrasekhara, translated by Karmavajra and Gzhon-nu-tshul-khrims (an associate of Brog mi). This
is said to be an explanatory tantra of the Yoga class.
47. TOH 2503. This is a commentary on the Tattvasamgraha, translated by Rin-chen-bzang po.
48. The Pradipoddyotana by Candrakirti. See discussion in BROIDO, "Killing," pp. 91-93.
49. TOH. 481. It is an explanatory tantra for the Catuspitha. The Tibetan title is Thams.cad Gsang-bali Rgyud,
translated by Padmākaravarman and Rin-chen-bzang-po. For a translation of the following quote, see WAYMAN,
"Sarvarahasya Tantra," p. 526 (verse 15).
50. The same tantra previously cited.



164
Dan Martin
to have perpetual congress with the way things are,
will delight in desiring the same for sentient beings
and lust for the supreme attainment.
Telling about two interdependent productions, the internal, or subjective
one, and the one of external objects as well
is sheer delight in telling lies,
as the yogi's context is non-contextual.
Whatever this Total Knowledge beyond the world might be, these statements are] actually restrictive,
serving toward its achievement. Hence, taking it as a sort of supreme substance, through methods of
perfectly appropriating this and other things that pertain to the Tathāgata, they are produced within ones own
continuum, and this is called "robbing others of their property."
In the same way, perpetual application (congress) to the non-dual and even-toned by way of fixing ones
sight on the perfect Total Knowledge and Realm of (All) Knowables is actually) a restrictive (measure) on
desire. Enjoying this sort of thing is (what] "enjoying desire" [means).
The just-cited Tantra also says,
Conventional-adjustment and strict-meaning truths.
These are the two organs.
What is called "pairing" (yuganaddha)
is their nondual congress.
Through congress with no distinctions between them
everything falls under their provenance.
This is the ultimate mode of the Great Lust of all Buddhas.
All external and internal dharmas covered by the environmental and biological realms are neither eternal nor
unmade, but still they are products of interdependent origination, and dependent on their particular causes
and conditions. Therefore, to teach that they are illusory and marked by falsehood and deception is to tell
falsehoods. At the same time, these very [dharmas) are, in strict meaning truth, supported by a groundwork
which lacks substance (devoid of substantiality).
Furthermore, it is as it says in the sūtra,
O offspring of lha, everything is false and mirage-like,
I also am compelled to teach in such a manner. Hence (I) tell lies.
Whatever the Buddha may have taught in a literal way pertaining to coercive magical actions he taught that
they have to be done by those who are capable of truly achieving the purposes of others [i.e., not out of
selfish desires), because they are immaculate personages with exceptional aspirations, they have clairvoyant
powers, and their ritual actions are done correctly. Under any other circumstances, [the statements] would
not be (literal).
If it is said that (tantras) are not Buddhist scriptures because they have such statements about slaying
and taking what was not given, then this would most certainly apply equally to the other Baskets, since they
have them as well.
Such words of advice (given by Buddha?] as the following one taken from the Angulimālasūtra 2 [help
show] his wide usage of elastic expressions,
I do not adhere to the rule of renouncing taking what was not given.
The way of robbing the property of others is one I thoroughly endorse.
The thing that was not given is known as Awakening,
This no one has ſever) bestowed on anyone.
Just because the Bhagavan sat beneath the Awakening Tree,
51. Note the ambiguities due to conflicting readings in the two textual sources at this point.
52. TOH. 213. It may be that these words are actually from the mouth of Angulimala



Did Buddha Mean to Teach Tantras?
165
you did not receive anything. (Your obscurations were not destroyed
This is how all the teachings are.
This is the supreme teaching.
Another sūtra says,
The father and mother are to be slain.
If the king, the two kinds of pure (priests), the surrounding country, their
audiences included, are conquered,
the one who does so becomes pure.99
This is interpreted as follows. The father in this passage is the seeds, the hidden karmic formations. The
mother is thirst, the thoughts which adhere to and thirst for the latter (in the preceding statement). The two
kinds of pure (priests) are Buddhist monks and Brahmins. To summarize their significance, they (tend to]
have a haughty outlook since they believe they become disentangled from the psychological mechanisms
(skandhas) that are under the compulsion of the all-basis consciousness (ālayavijñāna) through (external]
pure practices and cleanliness. They also think that keeping the supremacy of discipline and asceticism will
make them pure and disentangled. Surrounding country means the mental sphere ("country") and the six
sense organs. Their audiences are the forms and so forth of the external world. The one who thoroughly
purifies the foregoing things becomes pure.
We should likewise consider the following quote,
Who knows the absence of essence as the essence,
who abides always in perversity,
who has more emotional affliction than the emotionally afflicted,
will attain true Awakening
This means knowing the absence of distracting thoughts to be the essence. [The second line) means to keep
the right priorities in mind for the perversities that stem from a lack of right priorities. [The third line) tells
how the emotional afflictions stemming from the hardships of religious practices lead to attaining Awakening.
These are the ways to internalize the exact significances of the teachings which were expressed in
flexibly intentional statements without making mistakes. 94
53. For the source of this quote, not indicated in the passage, see the scriptural anthology UDĀNAVARGA, chapter 29
(Yugavarga). verse 24. It is all the more shocking that this verse is in the Dhammapada, which Buddhist modernists
have championed as a core "gospelof Buddha's purely rational moral teachings. The context supports Sog-bzlog-
pa's interpretation which follows. Where Sog-bzlog-pa's citation reads:
pha dang ma ni bsad-bya-zhing //
rgyal-po gtsang-apru-can gnyis dang //
yul 'khor 'khor dang bcas bcom na //
mi de dag-par 'gyur zhes bya //
The original text reads.
pha dang ma ni bsad-byas-shing //
rgyal-po gtsang-spra-can gnyis dang //
yul khor 'khor dang bcas bcom-na //
mi ni dag-par 'gyur zhes bya //
Compare also UDĀ NAVARGA, chapter 33 (Brāhmanavarga), verse 72. One of the general points of the verse in its
later context is that the external purificatory practices (etc.) of brahmin priests are ineffectual. To be a "true"
brahmin, one must get to the mental roots of suffering. It is interesting that SPARHAM, Tibetan Dhammapada, p.
217. note 244, gives (on the basis of his Tibetan informants) explanations very similar to those of Sog-bzlog-pa.
54. For those who might wish to do more research on Tibetan understandings in this field, the most extensive coverage
of this same material is by 'BA-RA-BA, Bka''bum, vol. 5. The dates of Ba'-ra-ba Royal-mtshan-dpal-bzang po are
1310 to 1391



166
Dan Martin
By way of conclusion
Introducing an early seventeenth-century Tibetan discussion as evidence for the eleventh and twelfth
centuries (when the New Schools were becoming "naturalized" in Tibet), let alone the Indian scene in earlier
centuries, provokes many questions, but a very thorough study indeed would be required to trace the entire
history of Buddhist scriptural rhetoric studies. It is not even possible here to adequately address the narrower
objective of tracing Tibetan understandings in this field. I would only like to point out that many of the
sūtras, tantras and commentaries cited by Sog-bzlog-pa would have been available to eleventh century
Tibetan readers and some as early as the eighth century. He does supply reference to a lost discussion of the
subject by Rin-chen-bzang-po from the late tenth or early eleventh century.
Although it is not possible to make a watertight historical argument at this point, we may still use Sog-
bzlog-pa to advance an alternative view of Buddhist tantra to the usual ones, a supportable hypothesis, if you
will. One common view is that Buddhist tantra arose as a popular, a-Buddhistic antinomian movement of
the Indian under-classes (Dravidian substrata, and the like). Others think that there was a tantric movement
instigated by a radical non-Buddhist elite (meaning the Mahāsiddhas) which somehow and for some reason
was co-opted by Buddhists to form the Buddhist tantras. I would not deny all truth to these scenarios. I wish
instead to present another possibility that, while not necessarily any more historically provable than the
usual one, needs to be considered just because it could broaden the horizons of scholars working on the
problems of tantra origins, not that it is my true purpose to uncover origins per se.
I shall attempt to state the alternative as simply as possible. The stories of Mahāsiddhas in Buddhist
tantric literature are not to be taken as historical fact (although the figures about whom these stories are told
may have been historical, this being beside the point at this point). They are above all stories, subject to the
same sorts of rhetorical analyses discussed by Sog-bzlog-pa. Their highly symbolic and stylized
"biographies" are meant to point toward Buddhist truths. Thus, when one encounters the Mahāsiddha Pig-
pen (Phag-tshang-pa) with a club over one shoulder and a woman under the opposite arm leading a herd of
pigs, one will know that these symbolize his transformation of the three poisons of aggression, lust and
ignorance (respectively). By doubting the evidence of the Mahasiddha stories, the architecture of the
common view begins to loosen at the base. This might then lead us to look for factors within Buddhism itself
that would account for the production of the entire range of tantric literature of which the Mahasiddha stories
are only a small part. What I propose is, in brief, a re-etymology of Vajrayana.
I repeat that I do not pretend to sufficient historical evidence for the following view, What I appear to
be doing is taking an insight from late scriptural rhetoric study and applying it back onto history - a dubious
procedure, but perhaps the results would prove worthy of testing.
The alternative I suggest is as follows. Mahāyāna scriptural-hermeneutical thinking reached a level at
some point (the fourth century CE?) at which the idea was widely accepted in those circles that the Buddha
employed several distinct levels of discourse. This sort of multi-leveled rhetorical analysis, after becoming
sufficiently commonplace in Mahāyāna thought, began to have consequences for the literary forms that the
subsequent revelations of Buddhist truth (scriptures) took upon themselves. Not just the literary forms, we
must add, but the liturgical, artistic and even meditational forms as well. These forms are the forms that
would be called, in their entirety, Vajrayāna, and moreover, they were found to be effective, even much more
effective, in promoting Buddhist truths.
This alternative view implies a simple reversal of priorities. When SnellgroveS7 says, ... for while the
tantra itself was intended to be understood in its obvious (and be it added in its often reprehensible) sense,
55. These sorts of theories are especially common among recent Indian scholars, who trace a few tantric elements back
to the Vedas, but credit "Dravidian backlash" with the main impetus for the "tantric movement." See
CHATTOPADHYAYA, Reflections, as an example.
56. See SNELLGROVE, in the introduction to his edition of the Hevajra Tantra (vol. 1, p. 12 et passim) where he
emphasizes the "elitist" nature of the movement, denying it was "popular" in the sense of a broad-based
phenomenon, saying rather that it was a radical movement.
57. SNELLGROVE, in his introduction to Hevajra Tantra (vol. 1. p. 17).



Did Buddha Mean to Teach Tantras?
167
the leaders of this new period persist in regarding it ir a figurative sense, we should require from him a
demonstration that the interpretive strategies of those he calls "leaders of this new period" did not exist in
the time of the tantra itself." In case we do not require this of him, we would seem to be tacitly agreeing
to an assumption because it is consonant with our own (and, be it added, perhaps reprehensible) interests.
That those interpretive strategies did exist in the fourth century is indicated by Sog-bzlog-pa's citation of the
Sūtrālamkāra, a reputedly fourth-century text 58 Assuming, as many scholarly critics now accept, that tantric
developments (properly speaking) came later, we begin to make a case for our view.
It clearly only becomes possible to understand these texts thoroughly by accepting their
weltanschauung complete, and this is probably an impossibility for a modern European. To think
that one has done so is not sufficient.59
These are highly provocative words with retroactive implications for Snellgrove's own historical scheme of
tantric origins as well as the alternative one presented here (and there would seem to be implied here an
ethnographical assumption that those who are born in a Buddhist tantric environment will as a matter of
course be able to understand tantra, an idea Tibetan teachers generally find ludicrous). These words, which
basically boil down to "Don't try it; it won't work," would place us in the situation of being incapable of
understanding the significance of things in another culture by virtue of our grounding in our own. Our
interpretive strategies would not work for them. Do we then need to remain entirely thwarted in our efforts
to interpret tantras? Our logical alternative to total bafflement would clearly lie in a study of the interpretive
strategies employed within the tradition we want to understand. What seems to be implied in Snellgrove's
statements, taken together, is that tantra was, in origin, something thoroughly comprehensible to us because
it was intended to mean word-for-word what it said, but became utterly confounding for "modern European"
minds only by the subsequent application of hermeneutical whitewash (which is the medium through which
the Tibet-born person "naturally" understands it, and which make it impossible for anyone else to
understand). The simple became complex, and the evolutionist assumptions implicit in the "historical
method" are served.
What my alternative model of historical development implies is that the interpretive complexity of
tantra texts is rooted in a prior interpretive complexity in Mahāyāna Buddhism. Vajrayāna was never
"simple" because Mahāyāna was never "simple" but rather possessed a sophisticated hermeneutic. With this
sort of understanding, Vajrayāna becomes an intelligible part of the Buddhist mainstream. Why should this
idea come as a shock to "a (post-) modern European"?
The common views of Vajrayāna in India help to sustain a common view about its transmission and
development in Tibet, and make the preceding considerations important to further germane arguments. The
common view (which Snellgrove shares with a number of philologically-oriented scholars), that the tantras
were initiated in India with literal intentions and only later had interpretive schemes applied to them, has its
corollary in the common view that the Old Tibetan Tantras translated in late imperial times were equally
literally interpreted and practiced up until the Later Spread or beyond. In light of the alternative view, these
assumptions also require re-evaluation. There were doubts, voiced in writing by the Western Tibetan King
Zhi-ba-od (late 11th century) and later critics, as to the authenticity of the Old Tantra scriptures (meaning
their genuine origins in India, although this leads to other questions which beg further considered, such as
how Buddhist were Buddhist scriptures in India?). But it is important to note that "authenticity of tantras
is quite a different matter from their correct interpretation or correct implementation. As Sog-bzlog-pa
repeatedly points out, the problem of interpretation applies equally to all Tantras, "Old" or "New", all of
them being subject to misapprehension and misapplication. Tenth-century bands of supposedly pious
terrorists (such as the infamous Ar-tsho Bande), if they were indeed such, were rightly censured by the
58. We also know of a work by Ye-shes-sde, one of the most prolific of the eighth-century Tibetan translators, on the
subject of the flexibly-intentional statements. This work, entitled Dgongs Ldem Dgongs Bzhi i Brjed-byang, is listed
in DPA-BO, Mkhas-pa'i Dga'-ston (1986), vol. 1, p. 402.
59. SNELLGROVE, in his introduction to Hevajra Tantra (vol. 1, pp. 33-34, n. 3).



168
Dan Martin
Tibetan tradition, but there is no reason even to entertain implications that the Old Tibetan Vajrayāna
teachers were of the same sort. There seem no good reasons, other than reasons of polemic or hermeneutical
naiveté, to think they were murderous profligates. The Mahāyānasūtrālamkāra with its levels of
interpretation was translated by the late eighth century or so, and the levels of interpretation are discussed
in the early ninth-century Sgra-sbyor Bam-po Gnyis-pa, and in a more or less contemporary work by the
Tibetan translator Ka-ba Dpal-brtsegs. These textual facts argue against hermeneutical naiveté. Of course,
these arguments would require much more extensive documentation to be considered entirely secure, but we
can learn to live with degrees of insecurity
Still, the alternative view is consonant with what we understand about the early Indian tantras and the
Old Translation tantras. In order to continue to follow the common view, we should be forced to demonstrate
hermeneutical naiveté in the earliest of these tantras. It is entirely possible to point out the use of interpretive
cues, for example, in the Old Translation Guhyagarbha Tantra and its Old Tibetan commentaries, where
they make their appearance in the very beginning in terms of the Five Unities (Phun-tshogs Lnga). In order
to rightly determine the realm of discourse, we must know the form of the Teacher (Nirmāņakāya?
Sambhogakāya?) and how this correlates with the character of the Questioner and Audience (devas,
rakşasas, bodhisattvas, humans? The Buddha talking to Himself or to someone emanated from Himself?),
the Time, and the Place (the objective realm corresponding to "subjective" states of the Teacher). By
understanding the context of the discourse, we should be enabled to ascertain the nature and manner of its
content. This quite conscious interpretive nexus has close interrelations with, and consequences for,
Buddhist thought, symbolism and art, a theme I have touched on elsewhere.61
One interrelationship is with the (non-duality which manifests in the polarity symbolism of the
Buddha's insight (prajñā) and means (upāya). If the Buddha adjusts His presentation of Buddhist truths, it
is because He understands the differing capacities of sentient beings to accommodate that truth (insight) and
He equally well understands the most effective ways to wean them away from their limitations (including
those in the realm of the ethical) so that they may be more directly confronted with Buddhist truth (means).
Those nurtured on Judaeo-Christian scriptural hermeneutics may find all this rather difficult to comprehend,
but they would do well to wean themselves of the expectation that Buddhist scriptures should mean the
same way as their own. Otherwise we go back to "square one" and rest content with incomprehensibility. I
think that would be going too far. Surely if Buddha could find the right method to get through to serial killers
like Angulimāla, He could find it in His heart to get through, in one way or another, to us.
Key to Abbreviated Bibliographical Items
ANGDU, Tibeto-Sanskrit - Sonam Angdu (ed.), Tibeto-Sanskrit Lexicographical Materials: The Sgra sbyor
bam po gnyis pa, the Dag yig Za ma tog, and the Dag yig Li shi'i gur khang, Basgo Tongspon
Publication (Leh 1973).
'BA-RA-BA, Bka'-'bum - "Ba'-ra-ba Rgyal-mtshan-dpal-bzang (13102-1391?), A Tibetan Encyclopedia of
Buddhist Scholasticism: The Collected Writings of Ba'-ra-ba Rgyal-mtshan-dpal-bzang, Ngawang
Gyaltsen and Ngawang Lungtok (Dehra Dun 1970), 14 volumes.
BLANG - Sde-srid Sangs-rgyas-rgya-mtsho, et al., Blang Dor Gsal-bar Ston-pa'i Drang-thig Dwangs Shel
Me-long (and 16 other texts), Sonam Drakpa (Dolanji 1979).
BOSE, Principles - Phanindra Nath Bose, Principles of Indian Silpaśāstra (Lahore 1926).
BROIDO, "Abhiprāya and Implication in Tibetan Linguistics" - Michael Broido, "Abhiprāya and
Implication in Tibetan Linguistics," Journal of Indian Philosophy, vol. 12 (1984), pp. 1-33.
60. The Sütrālamkāra is listed, along with two commentaries, in the Landkar-ma catalog. For the levels of
interpretation, see ANGDU, Tibeto-Sanskrit, pt. 1. pp. 110-112. A reference to the elasticity" (Idem-po) of tantric
expressions is also found in the often-cited opening pages of the Spra-sbyor Bam.po Gnyis-pa (see SNELLGROVE,
Indo-Tibetan, vol. 2. p. 443). For the work by Ka-ba Dpal-brtsegs, see RIKEY, Manual, pp. 91-93.
61. MARTIN, Illusion Web."



Did Buddha Mean to Teach Tantras?
169
BROIDO, "Killing" . Michael M. Broido, "Killing, Lying, Stealing, and Adultery: A Problem of
Interpretation in the Tantras." Contained in: Donald S. Lopez Jr., ed., Buddhist Hermeneutics,
University of Hawaii Press (Honolulu 1988), pp. 71-118.
CHATTOPADHYAYA, Reflections - Sudhakar Chattopadhyaya, Reflections on the Tantras, Motilal
Banarsidass (Delhi 1978).
DORSCH, Classical Literary Criticism - T.S. Dorsch, Classical Literary Criticism, Penguin Classics
(Baltimore 1905)
DPA-BO, Mkhas-pa'i Dga'-ston (1986) - Dpa'-bo II Gtsug-lag-phreng-ba, Chos-'byung Mkhas-pa'i Dga'
ston: A Detailed History of the Development of Buddhism in India and Tibet, Delhi Karmapae Chodhey
Gyalwae Sungrab Partun Khang (Delhi 1980), 2 volumes.
GETHIN, Buddhist Path - Rupert M. L. Gethin, The Buddhist Path to Awakening: A Study of the Bodhi.
Pakkhiya-Dhammā, E.J. Brill (Leiden 1992).
HABERMAN, Acting - David L. Haberman, Acting as a way of Salvation: A Study of Rägānugā Bhakti
Sadhana, Oxford University Press (New York 1988).
HOLT, Discipline - John C. Holt, Discipline: The Canonical Buddhism of the Vinayapitaka, Motilal
Banarsidass (Delhi 1981).
KARMA-PA I, Selected Writings - Karma-pa I Dus-gsum-mkhyen-pa, Selected Writings of the First Zhwa-
nag Karma-pa Dus-gsum-mkhyen-pa, Dzongsar Chhentse Labrang, Palace Monastery (Gangtok 1980).
2 volumes.
KONG-SPRUL, Shes-bya Kun Khyab - Kong-sprul Yon-tan-rgya-mtsho (= Blo-gros-mtha-yas), Shes-bya
Kun Khyab (= Theg-pa'i Sgo Kun las Btus-pa Gsung-rab Rin-po-che'i Mdzod Bslab-pa Gsum Legs-par
Ston-pa' Bstan-bcos Shes-bya Kun Khyab). Mi-rigs Dpe-skrun-khang, (Peking 1985).
KVAERNE, Anthology - Per Kvaerne, An Anthology of Buddhist Tantric Songs: A Study of the Caryāgiti,
White Orchid Press (Bangkok 1986).
KVAERNE, "On the Concept" - Per Kvaerne, "On the Concept of Sahaja in Indian Buddhist Tantric
Literature," Temenos, vol. 11 (1975), pp. 88-135.
MARTIN, "Illusion Web" - Dan Martin, "Illusion Web: Locating the Guhyagarbha Tantra in Buddhist
Intellectual History." Contained in: Christopher I. Beckwith (ed.), Silver on Lapis: Tibetan Literary
Culture and History, The Tibet Society (Bloomington 1987), pp. 175-220.
MI-PHAM-DGE-LEGS-RNAM-RGYAL, Snyan-ngag-gi Bstan-bcos . Bod Mkhas-pa Mi-pham-dge-legs-
rnam-rgyal, Snyan-ngag-gi Bstan-bcos Chen-po Me-long la Jug-pa' Bshad Sbyar Dandi'i Dgongs
Rgyan, Shes-rig Par-khang (Dharamsala 1980).
NAMKHAI NORBU, Dzog Chen - Namkhai Norbu, Dzog Chen and Zen, Zhang Zhung Editions (Oakland
CA 1984)
NAMKHAI NORBU, Rigbai Kujyug - Namkhai Norbu, Rigbai Kujyug, The Six Vajra Verses: An Oral
Commentary by Namkhai Norbu Rinpoche, ed., by Cheh-Ngee Goh, Rinchen Editions (Singapore 1990).
NEWMAN, Outer Wheel - John R. Newman, "The Outer Wheel of Time: Vajrayana Buddhist Cosmology
in the Kalacakra Tantra," Doctoral Dissertation, University of Washington (Madison 1987).
RIKEY, Manual - Thubten K. Rikey & Andrew Ruskin, A Manual of Key Buddhist Terms: Categorizations
of Buddhist Terminology with Commentary, Library of Tibetan Works & Archives (Dharamsala 1992).
SA-SKYA PANDI-TA, Mkhas-pa Tug-pa'i Sgo - Sa-skya Pandi-ta Kun-dga'-rgyal-mtshan, Mkhas-pa la
Jug-pa'i Sgo, Sakya Centre (Dehra Dun 1983). This is a reprint of the Beijing edition.
SANGS-RGYAS-RDO-RJE, Responses - Mkhas-dbang Sang-rgyas-rdo-rje (1569-1645), Responses to
Various Polemical Writings, Sherab Gyaltsen Lama and Acarya Shedup Tenzin, Zigar Drukpa Kargyud
Institute (Rewalsar 1985).
SKORUPSKI, Sarvadurgati - Tadeusz Skorupski, The Sarvadurgatiparishodhana Tantra: Elimination of All
Evil Destinies, Motilal Banarsidass (Delhi 1983).
SNELLGROVE, Hevajra Tantra - David L. Snellgrove, The Hevajra Tantra: A Critical Study. Oxford
University Press (London 1980).



170
Dan Martin
SNELLGROVE, Indo-Tibetan - David Snellgrove, Indo-Tibetan Buddhism: Indian Buddhists & Their
Tibetan Successors, Shambhala Press (Boston 1987), 2 volumes (pagination continuous).
SOG-BZLOG-PA, Collected Writings - Sog-bzlog-pa Blo-gros-rgyal-mtshan, Collected Writings of Sog-
bzlog pa Blo-gros-rgyal-mtshan, Sanje Dorji (New Delhi 1975), 2 volumes.
SOG-BZLOG-PA, Gsung Thor-bu - Sog-bzlog-pa Blo-gros-rgyal-mtshan, Several Hitherto Undiscovered
Writings of the Rnying-ma-pa Master, Sog-bzlog-pa Blo-gros-rgyal-mtshan (= Gsung Thor-bu), Sherab
Gyaltsen Lama (Gangtok 1985).
SPARHAM, Tibetan Dhammapada - Gareth Sparham, translator, The Tibetan Dhammapada: Sayings of the
Buddha, Wisdom Publications (London 1986).
TĀRANĀTHA, Collected Works - Taranātha (b. 1575), The Collected Works of Jo-nang Rje-btsun
Tāranātha, C. Namgyal and Tsewang Taru (Leh 1982-1987), 16 volumes.
TOG PALACE - The Tog Palace Manuscript of the Tibetan Kanjur, Smanrtsis Shesrig Spendzod (Leh 1975-
1980), 109 volumes.
TOH - Hakuju Ui, et al., A Complete Catalogue of the Tibetan Buddhist Canons, Tôhoku University (Tokyo
1934).
UDONAVARGA - Champa Thupten Zongtse and Siglinde Dietz, eds., Udänavarga (Band III), Sanskrittexte
aus den Turfanfunden X:3, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht (Göttingen 1990).
WAYMAN, "Sarvarahasya Tantra" - Alex Wayman, "The Sarvarahasyatantra," Acta Indologica (Indo Kotan
Kenkyu), vol. 6 (1984), pp. 521-569.



THE RMAD DU BYUNG BA IN ITS THREE VERSIONS
Eva K. Neumaier
(University of Alberta, Canada)
Gene Smith has been seminal in the preservation and distribution of Tibetan literature whose continued
existence was negatively affected by the political development that occurred in Tibet during the middle of the
20th century. Without his efforts and dedication to the task of preserving a rich and to the modern world
mainly unknown literature, our opportunity to learn about the diverse literary culture of Tibet would be
diminished for ever. My humble contribution to celebrate his monumental accomplishment addresses an issue
directly related to Gene Smith's own efforts, that is, the transmission of texts through the course of history.
The almost forensic work of Helmut Eimer, who devoted his career to detect the often mangled and
always intricate development and mutual dependency of the various editions of the Tibetan canon, as well
as the work of David Germano and his colleagues at the University of Virginia at Charlottesville, and that
of many other colleagues have shed light on this issue. Their painstaking research revealed that the
transmission of authoritative Tibetan texts was a creative process that responded to the needs, interests and
pressures of different cultural and religious epochs. By no means remained the texts unaltered when they
were incorporated in larger collections of texts, or when new editions in the form of manuscripts or
xylographs were planned. To uncover this process, individual texts need to be put under the scholarly
microscope. Eventually, with enough individual texts analyzed in this way, a more coherent picture will
evolve - as it has been the case with the Canon.
The present contribution was made possible through research funded by the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada, for whose support I am deeply grateful. The research focused on
identifying layers of editorship in the sems sde section of the rDzogs chen texts. This particular tradition
began to take shape in Tibet during the 8th century C.E. Philosophically its teachings exhibit some
similarities with certain strands of Chinese Ch'an Buddhism.' Details of historical influences are debated
among scholars. Today these texts are found in the rNying ma rgyud 'bum, the Hundred Thousand Tantras
of the Old Tradition and only few of them were incorporated in the Tibetan Tripitaka, while most remained
excluded. The indigenous tradition claims that this body of Tibetan texts goes back to the 8th century C.E.
and constitutes, at least in parts, translations of Indic texts. While the claim of an Indian origin of these texts
must remain an unsubstantiated indigenous assumption, the claim of its existence during the 8th century
could be substantiated at least with regard to a few texts, while the age of the majority of texts remains
unknown to us. The present inquiry is not so much concerned with the indigenous claim of the texts'
antiquity or even their claim to be translations of Indic texts but rather with bringing some light into the
editorial process these texts were subjected to
1. Traditional Tibetan scholarship denies this (see Tulku Thondup. The Practice of Dzogchen, ed. by Harold Talbott,
Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion, 1989; 2nd ed. 1996, pp. 112-122). A thorough analysis and comparison of the original
sources rather than of the writings of later Tibetan masters is still a desideratum.
2. Philip Yampolsky, “New Japanese Studies in Early Ch'an History," in Whalen Lai/Lewis R. Lancaster (eds.), Early
Ch'an in China and Tibet. Berkeley Buddhist Studies Series. Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press, 1983, pp. 1-11;
Dashun Ueyama, "The Study of Tibetan Chan Manuscripts Recovered from Tun-huang: A Review of the Field
and its Prospects," in Whalen Lai / Lewis R. Lancaster, 1983, pp. 327-349; Karmay Samten, The Great Perfection
(Rdzogs Chen). A Philosophical and Meditative Teaching in Tibetan Buddhism. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1988,
p. 257, plates.
3. A detailed discussion of the textual situation is found in E. K. Neumaier-Dargyay, The Sovereign All-Creating Mind,
the Motherly Buddha. A translation of the Kun byed rgyal po'i mdo. Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, 1992, pp. 17-26.
4. Daishun Veyama (1983) 340-44: Samten G. Karmay, 1988, pp. 41-85



172
Eva K. Neumaier
The rMad du byung ba and its Place in Tibetan Literature
The subject of the present analysis are the three versions of the rMad du byung ba, all incorporated in the
rNying ma rgyud 'bum. These three versions as well as some other sems sde texts present themselves in the
form of Māhayāna sūtras whereby the Buddha is in dialogue with an interlocutor while other texts present
thoughts on meditation and enlightenment without identifying either an author or an addressee. The
authenticity of these rDzogs chen texts has been questioned by Tibetan thinkers of the past and they remain
subject to some doubts. The present state of these texts is certainly indicative of a complex and convoluted
editorial process of which we know almost nothing. The Tibetan historiographic notes preserved in several
ancient works are more concerned with establishing and verifying lineages of transmission rather than
recording editorial manipulations of these texts. For this reason, it is the objective of this contribution to
analyze the three versions of the Mad du byung ba in order to obtain some insight regarding their
interdependence. The rMad du byung ba is one of the medium length texts and is sometimes counted among
the eighteen sems sde texts. However, the Tibetan tradition seems to have hardly recognized its existence.
Samten Karmay, for instance, only lists it among the other sems sde texts without discussing it any further,
while Tulku Thondup lists the rMad byung among three other major tantras," a group that is added, like an
appendix, to the "Thirteen later translated tantras." Whether the rMad du byung ba is a part of the thirteen
later translated texts is disputed as we shall see. The thirteen later translated tantras are called so because
they were, according to the Tibetan tradition, translated by Vimalamitra after Vairocana had returned from
his exile in Tsha-ba-rong (in East Tibet). Only the Vairo'i 'dra 'bag includes the rMad du byung ba among
the eighteen sems sde texts while neither the Nyang ral chos 'byung nor Klong-chen-pa in his Chos dbying
mdzod kyi 'grel pall and Grub mtha'mdzodl2 include it therein. However, Klong-chen-pa listed the rMad du
byung ba among a group of twenty-one sems sde texts and we may assume that for that reason Tulku
Thondup included the text among an additional list of sems sde texts." dPa'-bo gtsug-lag phreng-ba, on the
other hand, includes the rMad du byung ba in the group of eighteen sems sde texts but as the last one and
as a category all by itself. There he says the rMad du byung ba was taught to "annihilate those who break
the tantric discipline." Yet, the rMad du byung ba is included in the rNying ma'i rgyud 'bum (the Hundred
Thousand Old Tantras) with three different versions. This situation could be interpreted as indicating that
the rMad du byung ba was until fairly late time, i.e. that of dPa'-bo gtsug-lag phreng-ba (1503-1565), not
considered as an integral component of the eighteen sems sde texts. Rather, it was seen as a related text, but
obviously of lesser authenticity than the others. However, the fact that gNubs-chen Sangs-rgyas ye-shes
includes quotes from the rMad du byung ba in his bSamg gtan mig sgron (assumed to date not later than
5. rNying ma rgyud 'bum, Tantras of the Nyingmapa Tradition, ed. by Jamyang Khyentse, Bhutan, 1974;
MB 1: vol. II, pp. 1-68; MB 2: vol. II, pp. 567-624; MB 3: vol. III, pp. 1-33.
6. Samten Karmay discusses these eighteen texts at some detail (1988, pp. 23-24, 207-08).
7. Samten Karmay. 1988, lists the text on p. 24, but does not mention it when he discusses the sems sde literature on
p. 207 f.
8. Tulku Thondup. The Origin of Buddhism in Tibet. The Tantric Tradition of the Nyingmapa. Marion, MA:
Buddhayana, 1984, p. 27.
9. Karmay, 1988, p. 23.
10. R. O. Meise zahl (ed.). Die grosse Geschichte des tibetischen Buddhismus nach alter Tradition rNying
ma' chos 'byung chen mo (Nyang ral chos 'byung). Sant Augustin: VGH Wissenschaftsverlag, 1985, table 233,
1, 2 f.
11. Gangtok 1964, fol. 206b.
12. Gangtok 1969, p. 357 f.
13. Chos dbying mdzod kyi grel pa, fol. 206b, 6 ff., and Grub mtha mdzod, p. 357 f.
14.mKhas pa'i dga' ston, ed. by Lokesh Chandra. New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture, 1959, pt. 1.
221, 20 ff.
15. See note 5.



The rMad du byung ba in its Three Versions
173
from the 10th century) can easily be construed as a counter-argument. Thus, the situation is ambiguous. On
the one hand its being part of the eighteen sems sde texts is at least not very well substantiated while, on the
other hand, there is strong evidence that it was considered as an important sems sde text because being
quoted by gNubs-chen and being three times translated by different editorial teams.
The textual body of the rMad du byung ba in its three versions
I have chosen the rMad du byung ba for this study, not because of its content or its position within the
organization of the rDzogs chen literature but because of its textual preservation: the text exists in three
versions that differ substantially from one another, and quotes are found in a 10th century authoritative
source. It seemed that the rMad du byung ba was a good candidate for a literary investigation and textual
analysis (assisted by a computer based stylistic analysis) for addressing some of the text-historical problems
of the rDzogs chen literature.
Version 1 of the rMad du byung ba (MB 1) is preserved in 42 chapters in the second volume of the
rNying ma rgyud 'bum; its colophon states that the Indian master Śrīsimha and the Tibetan translator
Vairocana had translated it. MB 2, contained in the same volume, consists of only 40 chapters. Its colophon
states the Indian master Vimalamitra and the translator gNyags Jñänakumara translated and approved (the
translated text). Srisimha and Vairocana had also previously translated [this text], and Jñänakumara's and
g Yu-sgra's translation also exists." MB 3 contains only 11 chapters with no colophon attached to it.
However, the editor and compiler of the rNying ma rgyud 'bum edition I am using, Dilgo Khyentse
Rinpoche, states in the list of texts contained in each volume, which he provides at the start of the first
volume, that the third version was translated by Srisimha and Vairocana.
Without doubt the colophon of MB 2, if authentic, indicates that three versions of this text had existed
from an early time on. One, and perhaps the oldest, translated by Śrīsimha's and Vairocana, a second
translation and we may assume that the indigenous tradition views this as an improved one) by Vimalamitra
and gNyags Jhanakumära, and a third one by Jñānagarbha and g Yu-sgra.22 To make this situation even
more confusing, 'Jigs-med gling-pa (1729-1798), who re-edited the rNying ma rgyud 'bum previously
compilated by Ratna-gling-pa, lists in his rNying ma rgyud 'bum catalogue three versions of the rMad du
16. The dating of gNubs-chen Sangs-rgyas ye-shes and his bSam gran mig sgron is problematic, as S. Karmay has
demonstrated (1988, pp. 99-102). After examination of all the recorded evidence he comes to the conclusion that
the bSam gtan mig sgron must have been composed after 842 and before the end of the 10th century,
17. Nying ma rgyud 'bum, ed. by Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche, 1974, vol. 1, p. 4, line 3.
18. Srisimha and Vimalamitra, as well as other names, occur in the rNying ma literature as historical persons who were
instrumental in disseminating the rDzogs cher teachings (Eva Dargyay, The Rise of Esoteric Buddhism in Tibet.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1977, pp. 21-27). But until now they could not be verified in Dunhuang or other
contemporary sources. Till this happens, their historical existence remains somewhat dubious.
19. Vairocana as a contemporary of Padmasambahva is documented in a Dunhuang text (PT 44), as explained by
Karmay, 1988, p. 34, and Pasang Wangdu / Diemberger (eds.), dBa' bzhed. The Royal Narrative Concerning the
Bringing of the Buddha's Doctrine to Tibet. Vienna: Oesterreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2000,
p. 70 n. 238.
20. In the 'Dra 'bag, he is mentioned as contemporary with g Yu-sgra and as teacher of gNubs-chen Sangs-rgya ye-shes,
author of the bSam gran mig sgron, (Karmay, 1988, pp. 29, 69,207).
21. The Debther sngon po (N. Roerich, The Blue Annals. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1976. pp. 400, 417) mentions a
Jhanagarbha (alias Ye-shes snying-po) in connection with Mar-pa (1012-1096). It is unlikely that this is the same
person as the one mentioned in the colophon of MB 2 unless one dismisses the reference as fiction. However, Bu-
ston mentions a Ye-shes snying-po as being represented in a mural at bSam-yas together with other major and well-
documented figures of the late 8th century (Janos Szerb, But ston's History of Buddhism in Tibet. Vienna:
Oesterreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1990, p. 30.
22. Pasang Wangdu / Diemberger, 2000, p. 96 n. 377, identifies g Yu-sgra snying-po as a native of Tsha ba rong
and disciple of Vairocana; see also Karmay, 1988, pp. 27-29, where he recounts gYu-sgra becoming
Vairocana's disciple.



174
Eva K. Neumaier
byung ba contained in the first volume (Ra).23 However, there is further discrepancy with the Dilgo
Khyentse edition of the rMad du byung ba in so far as 'Jigs-med gling-pa's first version (Byang chub gyi
sems rnam du byung ha) has only two chapters and is said to have been translated by Srisimha and
Vairocana, his second version (Byang chub kyi sems rnam du byung ba or Chos chen po rmad du byung ba)
is listed as having 20 chapters (no translators mentioned), and his third version, with the same title, as having
Il chapters. In a note, 'Jigs-med gling-pa says that there are 53 phyi ma ta ma (?) and two later books (bu).24
None of 'Jigs-med gling-pa's versions of the rMad du byung ba seem to correspond with the present Dilgo
Khyentse edition. Obviously, 'Jigs-med gling-pa's editions of these texts had been further edited and altered
before they were printed by Dilgo Khyentse. Unfortunately, I am not aware whether the 'Jigs-med gling-pa
edition of the rNying ma rgyud 'bum is extant. Thus, I turn to the present Khyentse edition to analyze the
three versions to see how they relate to one another.
MB 1 and MB 2 render a text that is largely identical, although the organization by chapters is different.
For instance, chapter 24 of MB 1 was split into chapters 24 and 25 in MB2, while chapters 30 and 39 of MB
1 do not correspond to those chapters in MB 2. Furthermore, MB 2 lacks chapters 2 to 7, while chapters 25
and 42 of MB 2 do not correspond with the respective chapters of MB 1. The textual correspondence,
disregarding the above mentioned discrepancies, between MB 1 and MB 2 is baffling is so far as both
versions are said to be the product of different translation teams (MB 1 by Srisimha and Vairocana; MB 2 by
Vimalamitra and gNyags Jñānakumāra). The textual similarity of these two versions warrants further analysis
and, eventually awaits some explanation. MB 3, a much shorter text than the other two versions, contains a
largely different text, as expected from a different translation team. Thus, the question arises whether MB 1
and MB 2 in the Khyentse edition are truly two different versions or whether one is a re-edited version of the
other. If this question would be answered in an affirmative way, then, we have to conclude that one of the
three versions mentioned by Jigs-med gling-pa was either lost by the time Khyentse put together his edition
of the rNying ma rgyud 'bum or he excluded it from his collection for whatever reasons
Despite of this incongruence, the antiquity of some of the textual material now contained in these three
versions is to some degree substantiated by numerous quotations found in gNubs-chen's bSam gtan mig
sgron, which not only dates from the 10th century, but which is also, beside the Dunhuang documents and
the recently discovered dBa' bzhed (Pasang Wangdu / H. Diemberger 2000), the earliest account of the
religious developments during the imperial period of Tibet. That it remained largely unrecognized by the
Tibetan scholastic tradition, may suggest that the text has undergone little modification since its composition
in the 10th century.25 The gSam gtan mig sgron contains numerous quotations from various rDzogs chen
texts. The correspondence of these quotations found in the 10th century work with the present rDzogs chen
texts was the topic of a previous study. 26 Quotations from the rMad du byung ba found in the bSam gtan mig
sgron correspond only to passages from MB 2. Does this mean that version 1 and 3 are the product of some
later times? Perhaps. It could also indicate that gNubs-chen had only access to MB 2 while MB1 and 3 were
in circulation at his time but at different locations.
Computer-assisted Analysis of the rMad du byung ba
Left with this unsatisfying situation that does not allow us to explain the murky situation of these three
versions, one may turn to a different approach of textual analysis. Any analysis of text hopes to detect
something the text in itself does not reveal, at least not at the surface. If anonymous texts are analyzed for
the sake of detecting plausible editorial origins then there is the implicit assumption made that different
23. Christopher Wilkinson, University of Calgary, was so kind to provide me with the reference to 'Jigs-med gling-pa's
catalogue, for which I am very grateful. As to the edition of the rNying ma rgyud 'bum by 'Jigs-med gling-pa, see
Dargyay, 1977, pp. 70, 189.
24. I take bu as an abbreviation of bu dpe.
25. Karmay, 1988, pp. 102.
26. E. Neumaier, "The bSam glan mig sgron and its rDzogs chen Quotations: a study in the production of Tibetan
texts," Proceedings of the International Association of Tibetan Studies, Bloomington, 1998.



The rMad du byung ba in its Three Versions
175
people write in a different styles. Thus the style becomes a trace element, which leads the scholar to the so
far hidden writer - like in a good detective story. The studies by A.Q. Morton, AJ.P. Kenny, and. Y.T.
Radday?? have shown that the criteria for tracing layers of different editorships are not the overt
characteristics of a text in terms of its thematic content, but its inconspicuous stylistic and grammatical
elements. For instance, a computer-assisted analysis of the ethics of Aristotle focused not on the
characteristic terminology but on inconspicuous grammatical elements. The underlying assumption is that if
someone wants to alter the text, for whatever reasons, this person or persons will pay attention to the
characteristic vocabulary and terminology, but not to inconspicuous words whose only function is to give
grammatical structuring. Tibetan lends itself well to this kind of analysis because of the grammatical
structure of the Tibetan language - which uses particles to denote cases and function, also like prepositions
and conjunctions. These particles are independent words and can for this reason be easily isolated.
In each case the selected words are studied in terms of their exact occurrence within the text as a whole
and within each chapter of each version, their frequency distribution in terms of actual occurrence, and
expected one. In a last step, the difference between actual percentage and expected percentage is given. The
expected percentage gives the figure to be expected if the word would be evenly distributed throughout the
text. The highest or lowest differences in percentage mark those chapters, which give rise to suspicion. Then,
we may infer that these chapters show, for whatever reasons, a different grammatical make-up than the rest
of these texts and thus require further examination. If the sections of a text that are thus marked as deviant
exhibit also difference in terms of its preference for certain technical terms, and if these findings are
corroborated by a preference of themes, then one may propose the assumption that such a section had an
origin different from the rest of the text. That is, the deviating sections of the text have to be set in contrast
to its rest, whether it be in terms of stylistic idiosyncrasy or terminology. The implication then would be that
the themes covered in such a section might not be indigenous to the rest of the material
A careful analysis of the findings has to strive for establishing a correlation between stylistic and
terminological differences and similarities. Such procedure uses the stylistic difference as a lead towards
identifying the insertion of terms, which are alien to the rest of the text. Such analyses carried out on
different levels and by using different marking elements have a compounding effect on our pursuit to come
to a better understanding of the development of Buddhist thought through the ages.
For the purpose of this contribution, several grammatical particles were identified as leading trace
markers: the two different forms of the genitive particle: ba'i vs. yi; the negating particle med; the isolating
particle ni. The stylistic analysis is juxtaposed with a terminological one, whereby certain terms fundamental
to the 18 sems sde texts were selected.
For a terminological analysis of these texts the terms nam mkha' (heavens, sky), mal ma (stillness,
balance), and sems (mind) were selected because of the frequency with which they occur in the main sems
sde texts. Further the usage of the terms rtog (to understand, to discriminate or differentiate) vs. the term
rtogs (to understand intuitively) were examined. It is to be expected that the analysis of these two different
kinds of words will produce different results. The distribution of the grammatical particles will be indicative
of a stratigraphy of editorship while the distribution of significant terms will indicate the forger's attempt to
have the passage pass as "authentic."
Analysis of MB1 (42 chapters):
The chapters 20 and 36 of MB 1 seem to be marginalized in some way. In chapter 20 the negating particle
med occurs 4% less than what would be expected if the distribution of this particle would be evenly spread
throughout the entire text. The same is true with regard to the genitive particle ba'i, with the noted difference
that the percentage is only 2%; while the same text has a 7% higher than expected occurrence of the isolating
particle ni. In contrast to these findings, chapter 36 is by 5% deficient in the expected occurrence of the
particle ni, and by 2% of the expected occurrence of the genitive particle ba'i.
27. Susan Hockey, A Guide to Computer Applications in the Humanities. London: Duckworth, 1980, pp. 136-141.



176
dEva K. Neumaier
16
2
36
n/a
n/a
An analysis based on the
chapters with above chapter with below
terminology reveals that chapter 9 particle
average occurrence average occurrence
exhibits a 15% above average
occurrence of the term nam mkha',
ba'i
4/11/20/36
while chapter 20 is deficient by 7% yi
of this term. Chapter 7 exceeds every ba
36/42
other chapter by 4% in the expected
med
20
occurrence of the term sems (which
is found a total of 342 times in the
36
text). However, sems is in the entire terms
MB 1 never associated with the rnal ma
n/a
n/a
terms kun byed, or gzhi, which do not
rtog
5/35
2/36
occur in the entire text. The
rtogs
following chapter 8 lacks this term
by 3% if even distribution is to be
sems
expected. The term rtogs kun byed
n/a
(discriminatory faculty of the human gzhi
n/a
mind) occurs in the entire text 23
nam mkha'
9
20
times, while its homophonic sibling
rtog (intuitive and non-reifying insight) occurs only 3 times. This fact by itself is unusual as rDzogs chen
texts in general emphasis the non-reifying nature of mind over its discursive and reifying abilities. Chapter
11 is deficient in the expected occurrence of rtogs by 7% while chapter 36 exceeds this expectation by 17%.
Because the term rtog occurs only three times throughout the text, chaps 5, 8, and 35 exceed in the
occurrence of rtog by 32-29 %; while the chapters 2 and 36 are deficient by 5%. However, the infrequent
occurrence of this term does not warrant any conclusion to be drawn from this. The term sems is by 4% over
represented in chapter 7, and underrepresented by 3% in chapter 6.
The content of chapter 20 differs from other rDzogs chen texts. In summary, it says that the five psycho-
physical aggregates (skandha) are transformed into the 5 tathāgatas who constitute five different mandalas.
In the final part it is said that all sentient beings have the nature of these mandalas. This line of thought is
fairly common in the general tantric literature, but it is unusual in early rDzogs chen texts, which usually
reject such ideas. In other words, the unusual stylistic and terminological appearance of this chapter is
corroborated by its content.
chapters with above chapter with below
particle
Findings for MB 2 (40 chapters)
average occurrence average occurrence
The highest occurrence of difference
ba'i
16
2/20/36
between the expected average
percentage and the actual found one,
with regard to the individual med
20
particles, is found in chapters 20 andni
36
36, while the highest occurrence of terms
difference percentage is found in rnal ma
11/20
chapters 11 and 20, when we base
rtog
11/20
our investigation on technical terms.
rtogs
If we combine both findings it is
sems
chapter 20 that stands out as unusual
kun hyed
20
in terms of its use of grammatical
particles and in terms of its use of
general rDzogs chen terminology.
nam mkha'
26
11/20
yi
ba
36
schi
20



The rMad du byung ba in its Three Versions
177
5
ba
sems
Analysis of MB 3
chapters with above chapter with below
particle
(11 chapters)
average occurrence average occurrence
In the case of MB 3, chapter 1 is the ha'i
most deviant one. But no accord could
be found between the terminological
10
deviance and the grammatical one.
med
Comparison of the three
versions
terms
From the results of this analysis, it rnal ma
becomes evident that chapter 20 of
rtog
MB 1 as well as of MB 2 is deviant
rtogs
in terms of the use of grammatical
2/8
particles and its terminology
Chapter 36 is deviant in MB 1 only. kun byed
n/a
While in MB 3 chapter 1 stands out. gzhi
n/a
n/a
With the exception of MB 2, the nam mkha'
n/a
n/a
Mad du byung ba lacks almost
completely the terminology typical of early rDzogs chen texts, such as, kun byed, gzhi, and nam mkha'
Therefore, one may use a term that does rarely occur in early rDzogs chen text, i.e.dkyil 'khor (Skr, mandala).
If one examines the occurrence of this term, then, chapter 2 of MB 1 has 11 occurrences, while the same
chapter of MB 2 lists the term only 7 times. Chapter 20 however contains this term most frequently: 23 times
in MB 1 and 21 times in MB 2. MB 3, however, has the highest occurrence of this term in chapter 1. In other
words, the occurrence of the term dkyil 'khor is correlated with a deviatal use of grammatical particles
throughout the three versions of this text. It seems that even an initial analysis by the frequency of
grammatical particles versus certain technical terms can be used to identify passages of text that belong to a
different layer. In other words, in a thematic examination of the rMad du byung ba the chapter 20 in MB 1
and MB 2, and chapter 1 of MB 3 have to be studied independently of the rest of the text.
If we would use technical terms as the only criteria then we would certainly spot the "new" theme in
chapter 20, but we would be unable to say that it originated from another editorial context than the rest of
the text. In the light of the high deviating percentage (MBI: -4%: med; +7 %: ni; MB2: -3% ba'i; -5% med;
+9% ni) of common case particles and function words however, we can make such a claim,
Chapter 36, which made itself noticeable, contains only 2 references to dkyil 'khor in MB I and MB 2.
Using the Standardized Score (z-score)
The so-called z-score is a statistical measure that allows a comparison of the frequencies across the range of
different texts. The Z-score is the result of the following mathematical procedure: actual frequency minus
average frequency, divided by the standard deviation of frequencies. The Z-score is considered a finer tool
to trace differences in style than the mere frequency distribution because it takes into account a larger
amount of variances.
The following table gives the z-score for the five selected particles in the three versions of the text:
particles MB1 MB 2 MB 3
bali
3.903.582.72
yi
-0.05 0.13 -0.23
ba
8.06 8.27 4.24
med
5.07 4.72 6.37
4.18 3.67 2.03



178
Eva K. Neumaier
From these data it is clear that MB1 is much closer to MB2 than MB3 is to any one of them. This could
support a hypothesis that MB3 originated from another editorial context than MB1 and MB2 have.
Conclusion
If the findings of this computer-assisted analysis are contrasted with those of the above carried out literary
analysis, it is evident that for several reasons MB 1 and MB 2 are closely connected although not identical.
Such reasons comprise stylistic and terminological as well as textual similarities as discussed above. The
fact that only passages from MB 2 are quoted by gNubs-chen in his bSam gtan mig sgron suggests that MB
2 predates MB 1 and that MB 1 constitutes a partial revision of MB 2. Does such revision qualify for the
work of a Tibetan translator (lo tsa ba)? If not, then the assertion made in the colophon of MB 2 in the
Khyentse edition, i.e. that there was a translation of the Mad du byung ba attributed to Srisimha and
Vairocana prior to the one by by Vimalamitra and gNyags Jñānakumāra, may be called into question. As the
historicity of Srisimha and Vimalamitra remains undocumented, no further assumptions can be made. The
translation of MB 3 attributed to Jñānagarbha and g Yu-sgra seems to be a separate text that happens to be
transmitted under the same title.
Bibliography
rNying ma rgyud 'bum. Tantras of the Nyingmapa Tradition, ed. by Jamyang Khyentse, Bhutan, 1974.
Samten Karmay, The Great Perfection (Rdzogs Chen). A Philosophical and Meditative Teaching in Tibetan
Buddhism. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1988.
Whalen Lai / Lewis R. Lancaster (eds.), Early Ch'an in China and Tibet. Berkeley Buddhist Studies Series.
Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press, 1983.
Pasang Wangdu / Diemberger (eds.), dBa' bzhed. The Royal Narrative Concerning the Bringing of the
Buddha's Doctrine to Tibet. Vienna: Oesterreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2000.



OF BONE AND FLESH
Michael Oppitz
When I met Gene Smith for the first time in his hospitable home at Golf Links, New Delhi, in 1976, his
comment on hearing my name was brief: "Ah, the ruyi." I was surprised to meet an American in India who
knew about a recently discovered text on Sherpa clan history, translated and commented upon in German.
As this Report on the Bones (rus yig)' marked not only my own entry into Himalayan ethnography but also
a point of common interest with Gene, I have chosen a topic for his Festschrift that has direct links with this
text: the concept of "bone and flesh" in Himalayan societies.
My contribution is divided into several sections. In the first section I recapitulate the semantic field
inside which the terms bone and flesh have been found by different scholars of Tibetan history and
sociology. In the second section I summarize one indigenous theory of flesh and bone in a local culture of
Tibetan stock, as elaborated by one ethnographer. The third section deals with the same opposition pair
within the framework of a more general kinship theory; and the remaining five sections test the central
hypothesis of this theory with various cases from different corners of the Himalayas.
The terminological context in Tibet
The first European who appears to have understood and articulated Tibetan ideas connected with bone and
flesh was Ippolito Desideri of Pistoia, who traveled in Tibet between 1712 and 1727. In his extensive report
on Tibetan customs, he writes:
The Thibettans recognize two classes of kinship. The first are called relations of the Rupá-cik, or
of the same bone; the second, relations of the Scia-cik, or of the same blood. They recognize, as
relations of Rupa-cik, or of the same bone, those who descend from a common ancestor, however
remote, even when they have been divided into different branches during many generations.
Relations of the Scia-cik, or the same blood, are those created by legitimate marriages. The first,
though it may be exceedingly distant, is looked upon as an absolute and inviolable bar to
matrimony, and any intercourse between two relations of the Rupá-cik, or of the same bone, is
regarded as incestuous, and they are shunned and loathed by everyone. The second is also a bar to
marriage in the first degree of relationship, thus an uncle may not marry his niece, but marriages
[sic] with a first cousin on the mother's side is allowed, and frequently occurs.?
This sketch is supplemented by a second one, published nearly two hundred years later by the British
observer Lewis Sydney Steward O'Malley in the Census of India:
The rules regulating cousin marriage among the Bhotias of Sikkim are probably connected with
the institution of fraternal polyandry. There it is not considered right that a man should marry his
cousin on the father's side, though recently there have been a few cases where a man had married
his father's sister's daughter [one type of cross-cousin). He may marry his cousin on his mother's
side, whether the daughter of his mother's brother or of his mother's sister. The reason given is that
the bone descends from the father's side and the flesh from the mother's. Should cousins on the
paternal side marry, it is said that the bone is pierced, resulting in course of time in various
infirmities.
The Tibetan word for bones, rus implies the following extensions of meaning:
>bones, bone-linec, father's lineages, patriclan, clan with territory, tribes. The four big
prehistoric clans of Tibet, for instance, are called Bod-kyi-rus-chen-bzhi. Since this expression
closely resembles another, namely Bod-khams-ru-bzhi or the four horns of Tibet, the two words
rus for bones and ru for horns, wings, divisions, banner have at times been merged to form a
conceptual unit: that of an exogamic group with independent armed forces.



180
Michael Oppitz
Besides rus for bone-line, in older Tibetan texts, the term gdung or gdung-rabs is also encountered, gdung
being the respectful form of rus. Originally, the term gdung or gdung rabs was probably reserved for the
royal bone-line; later it designated the patriline of the nobility. In contrast, rus stood for the exogamic clans
of the free retinue. Members of a patrilineage, however, could also be designated by other terms, such as
pha-spun or phu-nu. The latter means, strictly speaking, elder and younger brother, by extension it means
blood relatives of the same generation in the male line<, people sharing a common name between whom
exists the obligation for mutual help and liability. If a family within this group dies out, the remaining phu-
nu relatives will inherit its property. The expression pha-spun is composed of the elements father and
children of the same parents. According to Kowalewsky's Dictionnaire Mongol-Russe-Français the word
spun is equivalent to the Mongol miqa cisum = »flesh-relations, a term designating relatives on the maternal
side. With the prefixed phu »father the spun, or children of the same parents are literally drawn over to the
paternal side. Both binominal expressions, pha spun and phu nu, denote people who belong - by horizontal
extension - to a common clan; they are patrilateral clan relatives of the same generation. By contrast, the
two terms rupá-cik (Desideri) and gdung rabs characterize relatives of the same clan by vertical extension,
through the generations. The horizontal terms complement the vertical ones. All four terms attest even for
early Tibetan history the elementary sociological importance of patrilineal clans. These clans were
characterized by the following features: a common clan name rus ming: a rule of exogamy for all people
with a common clan name; common funerary rituals; a common clan territory; common warfare; common
warriors spun mag
A remarkable parallel to the Tibetan term for bonec can be found in the Sanskrit derivatives had and
vānsa. The first of these means >bone in a general sense, but also bone lineage and paternal descent lines,
>People of the same bone< are called hād nāta, an equivalent to vānsa. The extended meanings of this term
may be traced as follows: bamboo, backbone<, >unlinear descents. The term alludes to an image that
combines both aspects of a lineage, the horizontal and the vertical, for each of which the Tibetan language
has to employ a separate word. The backbone metaphor unites both vertical and horizontal aspects in the
following fashion: The superimposed sequence of vertebrae embody the diachronic sequence of generations,
the synchronic aspect of bone relatives in the same generation is suggested by the separate elements of
which the backbone is constructed: the independent spinal bones. The same combination of aspects is also
present in the bamboo metaphor. The straight line of the bamboo cane with its regular segmentation reminds
one of a genealogical line with its diachronic sequence of generations; each segment, delimited by its knots,
can serve as an obvious marker for a synchronic generation.
As if wanting to illustrate this combination of horizontal and vertical aspects, the Brahmins of Gulmi
district in western Nepal enact a ritual during which they take a seat in front of a seven-nodded bamboo cane
in order to expel a class of anonymous evil spirits. In the course of seven days, they recite the Bhāgavata
purāna in the direction of the bamboo cane. Each day the evil spirits are forced to climb one section of the
bamboo cane, until they disappear altogether after the seventh day. The cane is a genealogical ladder of
seven rungs (generations), a span beyond which unaccountable prehistory begins, which means: the evil
spirits are driven out of memory. In addition, bamboo does not wither, it is upright, solid, strong and
durable: bamboo and backbones do not branch out, they remain a single stem: all qualities that one wishes
for a genealogical line. The opposite of this image is our family or genealogical tree which branches out into
collateral lines.
The connection between bamboo and bones, as suggested by the Sanskrit word vänna, can be found
also in an origin myth of the northern Magar of Nepal: A cowgirl, neglected and maltreated by her seven
witch brothers, is kept alive by an ox who transubstantiates his dung into lentils and rice. The brothers decide
to slaughter the animal. Before being slayed, the ox asks the girl to save his bones from the hunting dogs.
Secretly the girl buries the bones of her benefactor. Out of the grave the first bamboo springs up, and inside
the first bamboo the primordial wild boar is born. This pig becomes the girl's protector and husband,
destroyer of her witch-brothers. Thus, those who have eaten the flesh of the ox are exterminated, while the
girl who buried its bones is saved by a protagonist created from bones transformed into bamboo.?



Of Bone and Flesh
181
An indigenous theory of bone-kinship
The Nyinba of northwestern Nepal, (the ethnonym being an invention by the ethnographer Nancy Levine)
constitute a local society of immigrants from Tibet, which is divided into two social strata: higher ranking
landowners dagpo and lower ranking offspring of former slaves yogpo. Only the members of the upper
stratum belong to established clans or rü. In Nyinba thought rü covers three meanings: >bone , clans and
>membership of a social ranks. As bones, rü refers to the corporal substance to be found in man and animals
alike. It is the basic meaning. In the second meaning, clan, rü describes people who share descent from a
common agnatic line of acknowledged ancestors. It is a category of patrilineal descent. The third meaning
of rů (or rigs) hints at the social stratum to which a Nyinba belongs by birth.
All three meanings overlap, for they are founded in a common idea about reproduction and the role
played by rü in it. The Nyinba believe that the substance rü bone is transferred from father to offspring in
the sexual act, whereby the woman conceives. This substance is transmitted via the male sperm, the white
color of which is associated with the white of the bones. The soft, fleshy and red parts of a child's body,
however, come from the bones of its mother and are transmitted by her uterine blood
A very similar concept can be found amongst the Lepcha of Sikkim. According to their theory, life
begins at the moment of conception. When the liquids of man and woman mix, the soul of the child descends
from the abode of the gods. For the Lepcha, the semen of men and the vaginal secretions of women are
parallel substances. They call them penis-water and vagina-water. The semen of the father produces the brain
and the bones, the vaginal secretions of the mother the blood and the flesh.
Bone-to-bone transmission through the male sperm is considered by the Nyinba to be primary, with the
result that the physical make-up of the child is primarily inherited from the father's line. Each newborn baby
is connected with its real father and in equal measure with any forefather in the agnatic line, and even the
most distant ancestors are connected with all living bone-relatives through this bone link. All members of a
clan have bone substance from the same stock. Belonging to a clan is bone-specific. Everyone can boost his
identity in the generator of his bone membership.
Membership to one bone is expressed in public by commensality. Eating together< means to share oral
excretions by consuming food cooked in the same pots over the same fire. This is called kha dri, >mouth-
united. Man and wife, parents and children, members of the same bone and members of two clans that are
connected by marriage; all these are united-by-mouth. This commensality is more prominent in people's
everyday awareness than bone membership
The common physical disposition of bone relatives excludes clan endogamy. Violations against the rule
of clan exogamy are extremely rare and will be avenged by mystical sanctions: The Nyinba believe that bone
incest splits the bones of the culprits, which will show on their skeletons after death; their offspring will be
misshapen, born dead or of such bad health that they will die in early childhood. An intra-clan marriage can
be tolerated only after seven generations of common bone-descent.
In respect to the given social strata, the exogamic clans are endogamous. One does not marry outside
one's own stratum. Of the two mentioned social strata, only the clans of the landowners have names, Clans
with names do not intermarry with clans without names. The norms for layer-endogamy are based on the
premise that people of different rü in the third sense represent incompatible types of human beings, whose
mixture of substances is inappropriate. People say kha ma dri rü ma dri mouth and bone do not tally
Nevertheless, such connections between members of different strata do occur and their children are called
shag Isha half-bloods,
The fact that people of different strata are separated in regard to oral and sexual contacts is explained
solely by their bones not getting along. Rül is considered an attribute of real bones, but this substance is
independent of the bones of an individual. It is a substance that defines the physical shape and mental
disposition of a person. As all members of a clan partake in the same rii substance, it is this that constitutes
their specific clanship. People of the same stratum share certain qualities of rü which allow them to search
their partner in the same stratum - and nowhere else. In this way rit may be regarded as a hereditary and



182
Michael Oppitz
elementary substance, which forms the natural basis for consanguineous and affinal kin relationships, for
descent and social rank, handed down through men.
The complementary substance to rü is t'ag = >blood, sometimes also referred to as sha = »flesh. In
Nyinba kinship theory t'ag is the elementary substance for kinship ties generated through women. No rü
without t'ag. But t'ag is only complementary to rü, in so far as the primary component for the production
of uterine blood of a woman is the substance rü that she inherits through her father. A woman transmits the
substance rü of her father to her children through the medium of her blood. This transmitted substance
becomes the blood substance of the child. Whereas men transmit their bone substance< rü as rü, women
transmit their inherited bone substance as blood, t'ag. Consequently, the Nyinba do not envisage a pure
and independent blood line passed on through members on the matrilateral side. For them, t'ag is a derived
substance which cannot be handed down to future generations in its integral quantity. For this reason, the
contribution made by a woman in the transmission of substance has a smaller range than that of a man.
Nevertheless, t'ag provides the framework for matrilateral kinship relations, for the complementary nature
of descent; and for a bilateral quality of the rank system.
The mother-child relationship is the connecting point to the maternal relatives. These are collectively
called r'ag-relatives or mother-relativesc. Agnates are termed rü-relatives. The main difference between the
two is that the genealogical depth of matrilateral kin is shallower. It does not extend further than three
generations, starting from one mother-child relationship. Parallel cousins on the mother's side are referred
to as t'ag pun, brothers and sisters by blood, whereas children of brothers are spoken of as rüpa pun,
> brothers and sisters by bonec. Cross-cousins, on the other hand, are called nyen, affines, as they are
considered possible marriage partners. As a matter of fact, marriage between real or classificatory cross-
cousins (no matter which side) is praised as an ideal connection. It is said that affinity will be created through
blood< (t'ag), and the t'ag-name that a person carries is the clan- or rü-name of his or her mother. Bonec
and bloods are metonymic descriptions for kinship. What children get through their father is bonec:
physical appearance, abilities, features of character, temperament. The transmission is not reduced to
qualities of bone structure; the substance bone is rather the vehicle for the transmission of an overall
genetic package. The contribution of women in the guise of i'ag is their total hereditary substance, the
>bone-share of their own father's line, distilled in their uterine blood.
Clans or members of a bone-lineage do not enter into action collectively. They do not own a specific
stretch of land, they do not refer to a clan territory, and they have no claims on common possessions. What
they do have, is an exclusive right to a name of their own and a genealogical consciousness of considerable
depth, strengthened by the awareness of having a common ancestor and a common clan deity rü-lha.
An anthropological theory dealing with bone and flesh
The indigenous theory of bone-kinship just presented, the conceptual refinement and complexity of which
will not have escaped the reader's attention, should now be complemented by some theoretical reflections
made more than half a century ago by one of the leading anthropologists of his time. It is worthwhile
reconsidering these thoughts, as they were directly connected with an outline of a new theoretical foundation
to the study of kinship and marriage alliance. In his epochal work Les structures élémentaires de la parenté
(1949), Claude Lévi-Strauss dedicated two entire chapters to questions relevant to our topic, one of which
was specifically entitled "Bone and Flesh."
To recapitulate the context, in brief Lévi-Strauss isolated in his opus three elementary structures of
kinship that accord with three forms of kin marriage: bilateral, patrilateral and matrilateral cross-cousin
marriage. The first of these forms, bilateral cross-cousin marriage, leads to a system of restricted exchange
of women with direct reciprocity between pairs of alliance partners. The matrilateral type generates a system
of generalized exchange of women, who are given unidirectionally from one group to the next without direct
reciprocity between participating groups, of which at least three are necessary for a full circle of indirect
reciprocity. The third form, patrilateral cross-cousin marriage, was characterized by Lévi-Strauss as a rather
impractical mixture of the other two forms, as it needed at least three alliance partners (like the matrilateral



Of Bone and Flesh
183
type), and as one kin group would function with respect to another one as both wife-giver and wife-receiver
(as in the bilateral case), not simultaneously, but in successive generations. Regarding these three elementary
forms of kinship alliance Lévi-Strauss argued that, from a sociological point of view, the matrilateral type
would constitute the most perfect system, since it allowed all alliance groups of a society to participate in a
single ring of exchange. This advantage, he thought, might have contributed to the enormous success of the
matrilateral type of cross-cousin marriage over large stretches of Asia. According to him, generalized
exchange was spread, at least in more archaic periods, from the Gilyak in the extreme east of Siberia,
via ancient China, Tibet and the eastern Himalaya, down to the Kachin of Burma in the south. Many
diluted contemporary systems, mixed with forms of restricted exchange, like those of the Tungus and
Manchu, of the Olcha and Naga, were, according to Lévi-Strauss, at one time guided by a regime of
generalized exchange.
The belief (found in Tibet and other peripheral regions) that the bones of a person come from the
father's side and the flesh from the mother's should be regarded as a true >leitmotive to the presence of
generalized exchange. Especially in Tibet, the distinction between bone relatives and flesh relatives could
be "connected objectively with the formula of generalized exchange. And in China as well as in Siberia it
was probably the same." It should be stressed that this distinction is incompatible with a system of
restricted exchange [...] for in a system with restricted exchange each group is both bone and flesh to one
another, as it produces, to employ the language of scholastics, in the same way and at the same time both
fathers and mothers."'ll In a system of generalized exchange, on the contrary, two exchange groups form a
pair of opposites, where one is exclusively bone to the other and the other exclusively flesh to the former.
"If one accepts this analysis, one can conclude that the distinction between bone and flesh, wherever one
may encounter it in this or in a similar form, will indicate with all probability the previous or present
existence of a system of indirect exchange." 12
The central thesis reformulated for our context is as follows: The conceptualization of bone and flesh
makes sense in societies that praise the practice of matrilateral cross-cousin marriage; in those that prefer
the patrilateral or the bilateral type and in all others that have a system of symmetrical exchange, the
distinction between relatives of the bone and relatives of the blood is a contradiction. In the following
sections I would like to put this proposition of Lévi-Strauss to an empirical test by using examples that were
not yet known at the time when he published Les structures. Consequently, they could not have helped him
to amend his proposed thesis. Yet, each of the examples chosen comes from the larger cultural area which
supplied him with ethnographic matter for his own arguments.
Bone and flesh in variable alliance systems
Magar.
Amongst the northern Magar of the Dhaulagiri region in northwestern Nepal, one encounters a matrimonial
system which seems to confirm unambiguously the thesis propagated by Lévi-Strauss. This ethnic group
prescribes marriage with mother's brother's daughter (or her classificatory substitute), resulting in a mode
of indirect exchange of women. Peculiar to the Magar is the fact that this indirect exchange is achieved by
means of a minimalist formula: Each of the various marriage groups participates in a matrimonial bond
consisting of three partners only. Thus, the local society is divided into a set of independent matrimonial
triangles. In this truly circulative system of delayed exchange, each alliance group appears as wife-giver to
the second partner and as wife-receiver to the third, whereas that same group's own wife-giver becomes
wife-receiver of their own wife-receiver group. This pattern is repeated from generation to generation in
unaltered fashion, as long as this is demographically feasible. In this way, the triangular relation of
exchanging partners is extended by a long-lasting dual relationship of wife-giver and wife-receiver. In this
fixed dual relation, the local term for the patrilineal descent group, rus or bone<, automatically adopts the
meaning of wife-receiver<. Accordingly, the expression for the descent group of a woman, i.e. sya or flesh
(alternatively also called nui or milk ) subsumes the meaning of a wife-giving group<. The double
expression sya-rus designates givers and takers, predisposed as such by the practiced alliance system. In



184
Michael Oppitz
this disposition, sya constantly remains flesh for a given >bone group or rus, just as rus permanently
remains bonex for a given flesh group or sya, quite in accordance with the Lévi-Straussian prediction
Therefore it is fully justified to state that for Magar society the conceptual pair of bone and flesh as an
expression of an immutable relation between wife-receiver and wife-giver does indeed point to the practice
of indirect, generalized exchange, with the small reservation that the word generalized should be avoided
for the Magar, as the various matrimonial triangles separate the society into independent units rather
bringing them together into a single bond.
Tamang
The Tamang of central Nepal are divided into a certain number of patricians which they call rui or bones.
In one of their written texts, the Ruichen cyopge or the Eighteen Big Boness, their various places of origin
- all in Tibet -are enumerated, and each of the clans is associated with a specific clan deity, or rui-gi-pho-
Iha. The cult of these bone deities plays an important role in the religious life of the Tamang. The clan or
bones can be characterized by the following criteria: by patrilinearity; by patrilocality: by a strict rule of
exogamy according to which any breaking of the bone hād phorowa (that is, sexual union within the clan)
will be treated as incest, by the presence of clan-owned territories (kipar), and by the worship of clan-specific
deities. Membership of a clan is inherited through the bones of the father's body, na khru.
Tamang kinship terminology is predominantly symmetrical: parallel cousins and cross-cousins are
separated by different denominations, cross-cousins on both sides, however, form a single category, whereas
parallel cousins are grouped with brothers and sisters. The marriage system is semi-prescriptive. Sister-
exchange with symmetrical modes of reciprocity is frequently practiced and preferably is repeated in
subsequent generations. Sister-exchange is locally called depa = >swap(or barters,"s This expression is used
by the Tamang with reference to cross-cousin marriage of the bilateral type. The bilateral type can also be
encountered amongst the Nyinba dealt with above. Bilateral cross-cousin marriage is an ideal case of the
mode of direct exchange, with immediate reciprocity between a pair of exchanging partners. But this,
according to Lévi-Strauss, mismatches the distinction between bone-relatives and flesh-relatives as
designations for the exchanging groups.
Kiranti
The various Kiranti tribes of eastern Nepal also employ the metaphors of bones and a complementary
substance for affinal relations. They call relatives on the father's side had or hāļ nāta; those on the mother's
side are called dudh or milk. Bone or had comprises the agnates, milk or dudh the uterine kin. In their
kinship terminology, cross-cousins are usually paired with sisters. Moreover, sexual joking between cousins
is prohibited, which indicates that marriage between them is not valued at all. Unions between agnates are
tabooed for seven generations, those between matrilateral kin for three. Once the taboo period of seven
generations for bone relatives has run out, intra-clan marriages are not only tolerated, but intentionally
sought. Such a marriage between agnates is termed had phora or breaking the bones; one inside the
mother's line is called dudh phora or breaking the milk line. A single intra-clan connection of the had
phora type leads immediately to clan fission. A formerly solid exogamic clan group is now split up into two
separate marriage units, between which the contraction of marital ties is encouraged. The members of the
two newly established clan segments receive different magical clan names. Thus, the expression of
> breaking the bones for this act of clan fission is in no way a verbal exaggeration. The process is of
elementary importance for the dynamics of demographic change.
Breaking the bones is the means to procure new alliance partners or to dissolve existing marriage
relations that do not work any longer, be this for statistical or other reasons. Even if exogamy at the clan
level is required for at least seven generations in the male line, the institution of marriage does not promote
outward communication. Instead, people prefer village endogamy and endogamy within those branches of
clans that have split up by the mechanism of breaking the bones. This obvious tendency for endopraxis
leads to an atomization and localization of society and may have contributed to the fact that the Kiranti as a
whole have split up into numerous tribes and subtribes to a much greater degree than other hill tribes of the
Nepalese Himalaya.



Of Bone and Flesh
185
The remarkably close relationship noted between brother and sister argues against breaking of the milk
line<. Marriage through breaking the boness, on the other hand, is the second best solution for a brother not
to leave go of his sister: She will marry close to him, into a branch that has been broken off the same stem
and into a group on close terms and from which sisters can be expected in return. Even if direct sister
exchange is considered unpropitious, since cross-cousins of any kind are prohibited marriage partners, the
Kiranti nonetheless praise one particular form of direct exchange as their ideal: classificatory sister
exchange. Thinking and acting in this way, they bring together what Lévi-Strauss found incompatible: a
division of affinal kin into bone-relatives and milk-relatives with a mode of direct matrimonial exchange.
Naxi
Moving from the Indo-Nepalese Himalaya to the eastern quarters in the Sino-Tibetan marshes, some tribal
groups living there exhibit the same distinctive pair of bone and flesh< to denominate agnatic and uterine
kin groups. The kinship system of the Naxi of northwestern Yunnan, for instance, is based on the assumption
that paternal relatives supply the bones of an individual and maternal ones the flesh. Fathers are >bone«,
mothers are >flesh sons are >bone<, daughters are flesh. Women are like trees, men are like rocks; women
are mobile, men are not, Just like trees which root on rocks, women take root on the bones of men. Coming
from the bone-line of their fathers, women bring flesh into the bone-line of their husbands. In this way they
play a dual role in entertaining an ambiguous relation to two bones between which they mediate with
their flesh.17
In the pictographic images of Naxi religious texts, relatives on both sides are represented jointly by two
pictographs (k'o nddü) the first of which - a fence -- designates the male paternal relatives and the second -
a fern - the females on the paternal side and all maternal relatives. These two pictographs suggest, in the case
of the fence, the permanent fixation of the bone-line to one location, and in the case of the fern, the
transplantability of women and their flesh< substance. All relatives on the father's side, members of a
common patriclan, are represented by the pictorial sign for bone< (o) and all relatives on the mother's side
by the sign for lean meat« (na), which replaces the more general word for meat (shi).
The metonymies of bone and flesh affect many aspects of a Naxi life from conception to death and
beyond. After death, the flames of the pyre separate bones and flesh. The flesh will rise to the sky in the form
of smoke, the bones, buried, will return to the earth. This reminds the living of a prominent Naxi origin
myth, according to which the first human being, a man named Ts'o, after surviving a cataclysmic flood, went
to the sky in the search of a wife. After many years of corvée service to the sky god, he managed to marry
the god's daughter and bring her down to earth. This is why the sky as the first wife-giver is connected with
>flesh and the first male on earth as wife-receiver with bones. In remembrance of their mythic ancestor
Ts'o, the Naxi also designate their patriclans by the picture combination Ts'o-o bones of Ts'oc. Ts'o-o is an
exogamic unit, and under ideal conditions also a residential one. Pure bone villages (that is villages inhabited
only by members of a single patriclan) are relatively rare, but they do exist. Once a year, for the festive
Sacrifice to the Sky, in the course of which the sky bride of the first ancestor is symbolically commemorated,
every Naxi returns to the village of his bone relatives.
Bone« relatives have a horizontal and a vertical extension. In vertical (or diachronic) perspective,
> bones have an unlimited genealogical depth. In horizontal (or synchronic) perspective, the clan (ts'o-o)
regulates marriage politics and the law of inheritance (land, house, domestic animals), Marriage within the
>bone is frowned upon and considered as incest which would, in pre-communist times, have been punished
severely by the people of one's own bone<.
The opposition of bone and flesh«, important though it may be in Naxi thought and in everyday
conduct, cannot, however, be transferred to concepts such as wife-receiver and wife-giver. For relatives of
the flesh can be both wife-givers and wife-receivers at the same time to the bone-line of a person. This
follows from the logic of the preferred marriage rule which recommends taking home as wife the daughter
of one's father's sister. In other words, the Naxi practice, at least in ideal circumstances, patrilateral cross-
cousin marriage. They describe this solution with the formula: »Mother's brother catches the daughter of his
sister for his sons. In some rare cases matrilateral cross-cousin marriage or matrilateral parallel cousin



186
Michael Oppitz
marriage may also occur, but neither is particularly approved. For these two types the Naxi employ the
formula: "On the head of the muntyak and the river deer there is only bone (horn) and no flesh," which is
interpreted in the following way: in both cases the bride has to follow the same route<, (matrimonial
direction) as the sister of her father in the case of matrilateral cross-cousin marriage) or the sister of her
mother in the case of matrilateral parallel cousin marriage). It is obvious that for the Naxi, patrilateral cross-
cousin marriage is the ideal solution. As a result, the roles of wife-giver and wife-receiver cannot be
determined once and for all; in fact they are inverted in each generation between two partner groups. This
does not however prevent them, contrary to the prognosis put forward by Lévi-Strauss, from employing with
permanent success the opposition of bones and flesh to separate paternal and maternal, agnatic and
collateral relatives.
Moso
The immediate neighbors of the Naxi to the north, the Moso, who in historical perspective are closely related
to them, show a mixed picture of social organization. Their society is divided into three social strata:
aristocracy, commoners and serfs. The aristocracy is characterized by patrilineal descent, while the two
lower strata are matrilineally oriented.
Amongst the aristocrats, children obtain their name and their inherited possessions through the father's
line. The lower strata, on the other hand, are organized in a different way: Amongst them, brothers and
sisters remain in the household of their birth for their entire lives. Instead of marriage in the ordinary sense
of the word, the Moso of these strata practice for the most part a form of relationship which they call tisese
going back and forth) and which has been termed an institutionalized sexual union 20 and for practical
purposes might be translated as > visiting marriage.
According to this arrangement, a man lives in the household of his sister, while his temporary or life-
long sexual partner lives in a different homestead. During the day, the man works for the household of his
descent group, the night he spends at the house of his partner - as a visitor. Children that are produced from
such a union, belong to the household of their mother. Thus, everyone lives matri- or natolocally. Natural
fatherhood is not a matter of debate. The role of father is taken over by the maternal uncle of the child,
who lives in the same household as the child's mother and who is a visiting partner in another one. Name
and property are handed down through the mother's line, for, in this system of non-marital partnership,
patrilineal descent would not make much sense.
How does a society like this align the concept of bone and >flesh? Is it known at all to the Moso? What
is the use of a term for agnatic relatives, i.e. bonec, where the patriline has no importance, where its existence
is virtually negated? Bone< (ong, o or ah) comes from the mother, say the Moso. If a family has no daughter,
the bone line is interrupted. And where does the flesh come from? Bone and flesh both come form the
mother's side<, >bone and flesh exist together<; >without bone flesh cannot come up<,21
Traditionally, those people who have a common female ancestor live under one roof; they are called
ong hing, people of the bone«. People of a common bone are those who agree in recognizing a common
female ancestor. The matrilineal residential group of consanguineal relatives living under a common roof is
called the. All members of one lhe are of the same bonec. Those who live together as relatives are sexually
taboo to each other. Even if they do not live together under a common roof, people recognizing a common
female ancestor in the mother's line are considered as related by consanguinity. Sanctions against incest are
severe. Children resulting from an incestuous relation have no bones.
If the ethnographic information we have so far about this complex of Moso sociology are correct, we
are confronted with a twofold distortion. On the one hand, we are dealing with two different systems of
descent within one and the same society, one being patrilineal and one matrilineal, depending on whether
we are looking at the aristocratic stratum or at the two lower strata, those of commoners the serfs. Among
the aristocrats, one might expect a pattern conforming with those previously presented, according to which
the term >bone is related to the agnatic relatives in the patriline and flesh to those on the mother's side. In
the second system, (employed by the commoners and serfs), in which marital union is replaced by visiting
partnerships and in which brothers and sisters share a life-long domestic group within a household of



Of Bone and Flesh
187
maternal predecessors, the terms bonec and flesh are monopolized by the matriline. This appropriation is
made possible by the fact that - lacking wedlock and matrimonial union - the difference between allies (and
in consequence the separation of partners on the male and on the female side) is not a necessity. Bone and
>flesh, in a system of this kind, need not be brought together, they are, as the Moso say, together from the
start. Their juxtaposition becomes irrelevant.
In this respect, the Moso differ from all the other cases discussed, however briefly, so far. No matter to
which type of kin marriage the other Himalayan test cases give preference: to matrilateral cross-cousin
marriage as the Magar; to patrilateral cross-cousin marriage as the Naxi; to bilateral cross-cousin marriage
or sister exchange as the Nyinba and Tamang; or to a type in which cousin marriage is excluded but in which,
by way of breaking the bones, new options for direct reciprocal exchange of women are opened up, as
suggested by the Kiranti material: in all these Himalayan examples the term »bone« designates the patriline,
while a complementary term flesh, milk, or blood) stands for the mother's line, for the relatives
by affinity.
Some of the examples dealt with so far were stratified societies, such as the Nyinba (and perhaps the
Tamang in former days), divided into two and, in the case of the Moso, into three social strata. Each of these
strata has its own exclusivities and restrictions. Among the Moso the two lower levels cannot intermarry
with the aristocrats, who in fact display an altogether different system of descent; and amongst the Nyinba,
the clans of the upper level carry names, whereas those of the lower do not. This difference expresses the
impossibility of matrimonial communication between the two ranks. Extending the radius of investigation a
fraction further east and further north, one will find more cases of societies that combine exogamic clans
with endogamic social strata. And here we will find that the term bone<, while continuing to designate an
exogamic patriline, is split up into two subcategories to meet the division of society into endogamic ranks.
This separation is occasionally expressed by splitting the category bonec into black and white
White and black bones
According to older ethnographies on the Yi (formerly called Lolo) in Yunnan and Sichuan provinces,
members of this ethnic group had to marry outside their own clans but within their social class, thus pairing
clan exogamy with class endogamy. Society was divided into three social layers, forming two classes. The
uppermost layer comprised the ruling class nuoke, the aristocrats who held the biggest share of landed
property and of the means of production. This layer/class was spoken of as the black bones<, in contrast to
the white bones made up of the two lower layers of society, constituted by the qunuo, people of free origin
and owners of fields and means of production in modest proportions, who were nevertheless under the
obligation to do corvée and military services for the black bones and by the ajia, dwelling and working
on the property of their masters without any means of production of their own. Marriage between members
of the two lower layers was admitted, but strictly prohibited between the two classes of black bones< and
>white bones. Thus, the bisection of the system along the division line of black and white bones, rather than
the tripartition of social layers was decisive for marriage restrictions. Sexual relations between a black
bone< woman and a white bone man were severely punished, sometimes even by the death penalty. Within
the two classes there existed a number of patrilocal and exogamic clans. The preferred type of kin alliance
was bilateral cross-cousin marriage.22
The division of society into black bones and white bones< to denote hierarchical endogamous ranks
is also a widely spread phenomenon amongst the peoples of the central Asian steppes, but with an inversion
of the color assignment. For instance, the clans of the Kalmuk have been described since the earliest reports
as being divided into the white bones of the aristocrats and the black bones of the commoners. The word
for >bone yasum unites the relatives on the father's side, while the relatives in the mother's line are
summarized as flesh people, just as in the Himalayas. Johann Gottlieb Georgi speaks of three restates of
the Kalmuk: The nobles, to whom the princes also belong and whom they call the white bones the priestly
estate, and the common people called the black bones. "Nobles of female sex are white flesh and the



188
Michael Oppitz
common females black flesh, but the descent is traced without reference to the flesh, but only according to
the bone."23
The Kazakhs of the Altai region used to employ two different terms to denote their patrilineal clans,
both carrying the meaning of bone<: one being sök and the other uru or ruu, this last possibly being related
to the Tibetan word ru(s), while sök can be found both in Mongolian and in several Turkic dialects. Just like
the Kalmuk, the Kazakh of the Altai distinguished between two layered ranks: the white bones< aq syek
(sök) designating the noble clans descended from Jenghis Khan, and the black boness kara syek, consisting
of the commoners. Just as it was prohibited to marry within one's own bonec, marriages between white
bones and black bones were likewise not allowed. 24
The image of bone relatives for the agnates on the father's side and the complementary image of
>flesh-relatives on the mother's side are for Lawrence Krader the major conceptualization for the
supremacy of the principle of patrilinearity in all pastoral societies of the Asiatic steppes. At the same time
this concept was used to consolidate the interior division of society into classes. According to him the
division into white bones and black bones<, was a step to ossify the structure of society: wherever it
occurred "states or empires were established, great despotic and monarchic enterprises."-25 The societies
concerned were the Ordos, the Khalkha, the Chakar and all eastern Mongolian groups; the Kalmuks amongst
the western Mongols; and the Kazakh and the Usbek among the Turks. The only ones to escape these
developments were the Altai Turks, the Kirgiz, the Buryats, the Monguor of Gansu and the Turkmen, as they
never made the division between >white and black bones.
In view of the manifold compatibilities that have become apparent, in this combined theoretical and
field study, between the conceptual pair of bones and flesh and different elementary types of marriage
alliance, it is debatable whether the sharp contrasts which Lévi-Strauss formulated in regard to the two basic
modes of reciprocity - direct and restricted exchange on the one hand and indirect and generalized exchange
on the other - are really fundamental; or whether they are not passages from one to the other. It was in this
direction that the senior master of anthropology pointed his argument in a most recent number of L'Homme,
dedicated exclusively to kinship studies. In his epilogue, Lévi-Strauss distinguished two modalities of
generalized exchange, an aleatoric one and a directional one. For the modality caused by chance, he gave a
simple formula: One gives to others than those from whom one receives, and one receives from others than
those to whom one gives. Consequently, the directional form of generalized exchange is only a special case
within the aleatoric modality and restricted exchange only a special case within directional, generalized
exchange, representing its narrow limit.26 The wealth of marriage regulations and the variable types of
alliance with which the concept of bones and flesh are compatible, point in the direction of such a view.
I end my little Himalayan survey with a note on the Sherpa with whom I originally began. Their social
organization rests on strong patrilineal and patrilocal clans which they call ru or bones. The
complementary substance sha >flesh designates the relatives on the female side. There is nothing peculiar
to this. It confirms the expected pattern, followed by many Tibetan and other Himalayan local cultures. The
rus vig or Report on the Bones and other documents on Sherpa clan history suggest an insight into the
development and transformation of their basic social units. This insight informs us that the Sherpa at the time
of their migration from Kham to Solu Khumbu and their formation as an ethnic group in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries comprised four protoclans. This number may be conventional to fit the ancient
Tibetan model of the Bod-kyi-rus-chen-bzhi or Four Big Clans of Tibet< or it may be a version of the
fourfold social classification suggested by Nick Allen as an underlying pattern for various cis- and trans-
Himalayan societies.27
In any case, in the course of the settlers' territorial expansion in Solu Khumbu, these four proto-clans
split up into a considerable number of subclans (over thirty by the middle of the twentieth century). Now,
the amazing result of a statistical survey that I conducted in 1965 on Sherpa migration and marriage patterns
was the fact that these new clan units, each of which had adopted a new clan name and some of which had
even occupied freshly acquired clan territories in the new clans' names, continued to operate matrimonially
as if they had never split up. None of the new subclans would contract a marriage with another subclan when



Of Bone and Flesh
189
both were sure to be derived from a common protoclan. Despite the considerable number of thirty-odd
named subclans into which the Sherpa became divided, they continued to act in their matrimonial habits as
if they still comprised only four.
In other words: Sherpa clans are extremely solid: the bones may split or branch out, but they cannot be
broken. This is a collective conduct in striking contrast to that of the neighboring Kiranti groups. Whereas the
latter practice a narrow form of matrimonial endopraxis with constant breaking up of bones, the Sherpa display
a very high level of exopraxis. Because of their unbending loyalty to their rule of clan exogamy, their original
>bones have remained - subcutaneously - intact. This conspicuous feature of strict exopraxis may be seen in
the light of another characteristic of Sherpa social organization: they have never adopted any elementary form
of marriage alliance, - neither matrilateral, nor bilateral nor patrilateral cross-cousin marriage. Nevertheless,
they distinguish between bone-relatives and flesh-relatives. For them, this distinction has nothing to do with
restricted or with generalized exchange; it is just an invitation to the bones< to remain straight and continuous
and to hold to the single rule that the Sherpa have followed from the earliest times to marry women of
different flesh outside their own bones.
Notes
1. A German translation of the rus yig appeared in: Michael Oppitz: Geschichte und Sozialordnung der Sherpa,
Innsbruck/München 1968: 34ff, and the original text was reproduced as: Icags dpon gsangs gyas dpal for: rus yig
- Text des "Berichts von den Knochen" in der Originalfassung, in: EW. Funke (ed.): Die Sherpa und ihre
Nachbarn, Innsbruck/München 1982. pp. 285-295.
2. Filippo de Filippi: An Account of Tibet. The Travels of Ippolito Desideri of Pistoia, S.J. 1712-1727 London 1932
p. 192.
3. L. S. S. O'Malley in the Censues of India, 1911, vol. V, p. 326.
4. Eric Haarh: The Yarlung Dynasty, Kobenhavn 1969, Ch.12: p. 271 ff., and Giuseppe Tucci: "The Secret Characters
of the Kings of Ancient Tibet," East and West, VI, 3, p. 204.
5. A. Róna Tas: "Social Terms in the List of Grants of the Tibetan Tun-Huang Chronicle," Acta Orientalia Scientiarum
Hungaricue, V, 3, 1955, pp. 249-270.
6. Marie Lecomte-Tilouine: The proof of the bone: lineage and devali in Central Nepal." Contributions to Indian
Sociology (n.s.) 27, 1, 1993, p. 4.
7. Michael Oppitz: "The Wild Boar and the Plough. Origin Stories of the Northern Magar," Kailash, X, 3, 1983,
Pp. 187-226.
8. The description of Nyinba social thought presented here, paraphrases to a large extent Nancy Levine: "The Theory
of Rü: Kinship, Descent and Status in a Tibetan Society," Himalayan Highland Societies in Anthropological
Perspective, edited by Chr. von Fürer-Haimendorf, New Delhi 1981, pp. 52-77; and Ch. 3: Descendent, Kinship,
and Alliance of Nancy Levine: The Dynamics of Polyandry. Kinship. Domesticity and Population on the Tibetan
Border: Chicago 1988.
9. Geoffrey Gorer: Himalayan Village, London 1938, p. 283.
10. Claude Lévi-Strauss: Les structures élémentaires de la parente, Paris 1949, p. 486.
11. Ibid. p. 486.
12. Ibid. p. 487.
13. Michael Oppitz: Onkels Tochter keine sonst. Heiratshundnis und Denkweise in einer Lokalkıdtur des Himalaya,
Frankfurt 1991. p. 43 ff.
14. Alexander W. Macdonald: "Les Tamang vus par l'un d'eux," L'Homme, VI, I, 1966, pp. 27-58.
15. Gérard Toffin: "Unités de parenté, système d'alliance et de prestations chez les Tamang de l'Ouest," Anthropos, 81,
1986, pp. 21-45.
16. For the Kulunge Rai, see Charles McDougal: "Structure and Division in Kulunge Rai Society. Kailash, 1.3, 1973,
pp. 205-224 and: The Kulunge Rai. A Study in Kinship and Marriage Exchange (Bibliotheca Himalayica III, 14),
Kathmandu 1979. For the Mewahang Rai, see Martin Gaenszle: Verwandtschaft und Mythologie bei den Mewahang
Rai in Ostepal, Stuttgart 1991, Ch. 20, pp. 213-238.
17. Charles F. McKhann: "Fleshing out the Bones: The Cosmic and Social Dimensions of Space in Naxi Architecture,
in: Ethnicity and Ethnic Groups in China, edited by Chien Chiao and Nicholas Tapp, New Asia Academic Bulletin
vol. VIII, Hong Kong 1989 pp. 157-177. Charles McKhann's: Fleshing out the Bones: Kinship and Cosmology in



190
Michael Oppitz
Naqxi Religion, Ph. D. thesis, University of Chicago, 1992, Ch. 7, "Of Bone and Flesh: Kinship and Marriage."
pp. 298-329.
18. Gernot Prunner: The Kinship System of the Nakhi (SW-China) as Seen in Their Pictographic Script," Ethnos, 34,
1969, pp. 102-104
19. The Sacrifice to the Sky ritual is described in: "The Propitiation of Heaven. Photographs by Joseph Rock," in: Naxi
and Moso Ethnography. Kin, Rites, Pictographs, edited by Michael Oppitz and Elisabeth Hsu, Zurich 1998, pp.
173-188.
20. Shih Chuan-kang: The Yongning Moso: Sexual Union and Household Organisation, Gender and Ethnicity in a
Matrilineal Duolocal Society in Southwest China. Stanford University, Ph. D. dissertation, Stanford 1993; and two
articles by the same author: "Mortuary Rituals and Symbolism among the Moso," in: Naxi and Moso Ethnography,
Kin, Rites, Pictographs, edited by Michael Oppitz and Elisabeth Hsu, Zurich 1998: 103-125; and: "Tisese and its
anthropological significance. Issues around the visiting sexual system among the Moso," L'Homme, 154-155, 2000,
pp. 697-709. Susanne Knödel: Die matrilinearen Mosuo von Yongning: Eine quellenkritische Auswertung moderner
chinesischer Ethnographien, "Kölner Ethnologische Studien," 22, Münster 1995.
21. Cai Hua: Une société sans père ni mari. Les Na de Chine, Paris 1997, p. 95 f.
22. Lin Yueh-hwa: "The Kinship System of the Lolo," Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies, 11, 1946, pp. 81-95; Lin
Yueh-Hwa: The Lolo of Liang Shan, New Haven 1961; Han Yi Feng and John K. Shyrock: The Historical Origins
of the Lolo," Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies, 3, 1938, no. 2: Paul K. Benedict: "Tibetan and Chinese Kinship
Terms," Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies, 6, 1941, pp. 313-337.
23. Johann Gottlieb Georgi: Beschreibung aller Nationen des Russischen Reiches (vier Teile), St. Petersburg
1776-1780, p. 402.
24. A. E. Hudson: Kazak Social Structure, New Haven 1938, pp. 18, 78.
25. Lawrence Krader: Social Organisation of the Mongol Turkic Pastoral Nomads, Indiana University Publications.
Uralic and Altaic Series, vol. 20, The Hague 1963, p. 324.
26. Claude Lévi-Strauss: "Postface," L'Homme, 154-155, 2000, p. 714.
27. Nicholas Allen: "Fourfold classifications of society in the Himalayas," in: James Fisher (ed.): Himalayan
Anthropology: The Indo-Tibetan interface, The Hague 1978: pp. 7-25; and Nicholas Allen: "Quadripartition of
society in early Tibetan Sources," Journal Asiatique, 266, 1978, pp. 341-360.



'JU MI PHAM RNAM RGYAL RGYA MTSHO.
HIS POSITION IN THE TIBETAN RELIGIOUS HIERARCHY AND
A SYNOPTIC SURVEY OF HIS CONTRIBUTIONS
Karma Phuntsho
(Balliol College, Oxford)
The history of Tibetan scholarship, especially that of rNying ma, the earliest school of Tibetan Buddhism,
entered a new phase in the nineteenth century. This era not only saw the proliferation of visionary teachings
(dag snang and dgongs gter) and the development of the ecumenical (ris med) movement? but also
witnessed a strong regeneration of rNying ma literary activity. Among the numerous luminaries of this
period was 'Ju Mi pham Nam rgyal Gya mtsho (1846-1912), perhaps the greatest polymath Tibet ever
produced. Mipham was both an extraordinary scholar and a saint in whom the sNga 'gyur (Nying ma
doctrine found renewed expression. The contribution of Mipham to rNying ma scholarship and thereby to
wider Tibetan and Buddhist learning is prodigious in its novelty, profundity and variety. His writings
comprise works on a wide range of subjects, covering almost every science known to his milieu.
To the western audience, it was E. Gene Smith who first introduced Mipham in 1969 describing him as
'one of the most imaginative and versatile minds to appear in the Tibetan tradition. Since then, although
the extraordinary nature of his life and works began to attract the attention of western scholars, his enigmatic
life and monumental works remain little studied. Despite the brief discussions of Mipham's life and works
by Steven Goodman and John Pettit, and the rendering of the catalogue of his writings into German by
Dieter Schuh, no attempt has so far been made to gain a complete overview of his output, to reveal the
assumptions which lie behind it, or to assess its significance as whole.
Having explored his works briefly, I shall attempt to provide a purview of his massive collection of
writings and highlight some of his outstanding contributions. In the first part of this paper, I shall appraise
his position in the Tibetan Buddhist and the scholarly hierarchies and shall then undertake a synoptic
discussion of his writings. This paper, however, is far from being a comprehensive study of Mipham's
writings and it would not do justice to his diverse and stupendous contributions to even attempt to
summarise them in a few pages.
The Position of Mipham in the Tibetan Religious and Scholarly Hierarchies
It might not be an exaggeration to claim that Mipham is the most remarkable polyhistorian and prolific
writer in the whole history of Tibetan Buddhism. As far as we know, only one scholar, Bo dong Pan chen
Phyogs las rNam rgyal (1375-1451), surpassed Mipham in the volume of his work. Yet Mipham remains
unparalleled in his versatility and originality for Bo dong Pan chen was not as protean and innovative as he.
Mipham's wide range of interests not only made him master most of the traditional sciences and arts, but
led to the composition and presentation of new theories and methods in philosophy, epistemology, medicine,
astrology, art, architecture. It is due to this polymathic nature of his learning and to his exceptional ingenuity
that Mipham today ranks amongst the leading religious and spiritual celebrities of Tibet.
Mipham stands among such great masters as Klong chen pa (1308-63), Sa skya Panchen (1182-1251),
Tsong kha pa (1357-1419), and Pad ma dKar po (1527-92). Like a few other masters of superb erudition,
Mipham has earned such respect and devotion from posterity that he has come to be accorded the title
Omniscient (Kun mkhyen). Although the title Kun mkhyen, and for that matter other honorific and
hyperbolic terms, are not to be taken literally and are sometimes misemployed by Tibetan scholars through
their love of panegyric, Kun mkhyen is nonetheless a prestigious epithet reserved for only a few exalted
masters, impressive for their scholarship and meditative realization
Another epithet the use of which indicates the social and religious stature of the person for whom it is
used is 'Jam mgon or Manju(śri)nātha. Mipham is among the very few scholars, including Sa skya Pandita,



192
Karma Phuntsho
Tsong kha pa, mkhyen brtse'i dBang po (1820-92) and Kong sprul (1813-99), who are given this title of
religious eminence. Likewise, Mipham is enumerated as one of the Three 'Jam mgons of Khams" (Khams
kyi jam mgon rnam gsum), the two others being his masters mkhyen brtse'i dBang po and Kong sprul.
This title, which identifies the master for whom it is used with Manjusri, the Buddha of Wisdom, is perhaps
the most prestigious epithet available to signify the wisdom and scholarship of a master
Gene Smith assumes the application of the title 'Jam mgon to Mipham to have occurred after he had
the vision of his personal deity, Manjusri, during his eighteen month retreat in 'Ju nyung abbey propitiating
Manjusri. Mipham often used as his pen name 'Jam dpal dGyes pa'i rDo rje, and sometimes, more
pompously, 'Jam dpal dGyes pa'i rDo rje m Tsho byung bZhad pa'i Rang mdangs. His other pen names, like
Blo gros Dri med, Mati and Dhi, also suggest assertion of his own wisdom and learning.
With the dissemination of his philosophical writings, Mipham's reputation as a philosopher,
hermeneutist and polemicist began to spread beyond the circles of rNying ma scholars by the middle of his
academic life. It seems that in the initial stage of his popularity Mipham became notorious among the dGe
lugs pas for his opposition to their interpretations. His opponents, including Hor Brag dkar sPrul sku bs Tan
'dzin sNyan grags (1867-1910/11) and dPa'ri ba Blo bzang Rab gsal (1840-1910), initially portrayed him
as an impertinent dissenter challenging the great dGe Idan pa doctrinal positions."
mKhan po 'Jigs med Phun tshogs, a staunch follower of Mipham in modern Tibet, recounts in his
biography of Mipham, Sound of the Victorious Battle drum, 2 how the monks of the three de lugs pa seats
in central Tibet attempted to vanquish Mipham through sorcery and exorcisms. Mipham however triumphed
unharmed through his spiritual powers and the sorcery and exorcism are said to have rebounded onto the
performers themselves, bringing abnormal diseases and death. When the gNas chung oracle was consulted
and the cause of the problems found, the thirteenth Dalai Lama sent emissaries to Mipham with apologies,
Whether or not this account is credible, Mipham's fame and popularity continued to rise and even dGe lugs
pa scholars came to admire and respect him. Despite his growing prestige, his opponent Brag dkar sPrul sku
seems to have continued to regard him with contempt, whereas dPa' ri Rab gsal not only acknowledged
Mipham's scholarship but went to the extent of eulogizing it and referring to Mipham as Manjusri.
Like dPa' ri Rab gsal, scholars from all traditions began to appreciate Mipham as they came to know
him better through the printing and propagation of his numerous works. Mipham however did not enjoy in
his lifetime the same degree of respect and renown as he does now. By the middle of this century, the bka'
brgyud pa and Sa skya pa admiration of Mipham developed so far that they included Mipham's writings,
such as his commentary on Madhyamakālamkāra and, mKhas 'jug in their academic syllabus. So far, gZhan
dga (1871-1927) is the only other rNying ma master whose works have been incorporated in the curricula
of other traditions, although the reasons for including gZhan dga' and Mipham are quite different. The use
of prayers and ritualistic writings by Mipham in bka brgyud and Sa skya liturgies has now become
common. The late rJe mKhan po dGe 'dun Rin chen, the supreme head of the 'Brug pa bka' brgyud school
in Bhutan, for instance, was earnestly propagating Mipham's prayer for good auspices entitled bkra shis
brgyad pa. The inclusion of a short supplication to Mañjuśri by Mipham among the daily liturgies of Ga
Idan, a chief dGe lugs pa monastery, is yet another unprecedented dimension in the influence of Mipham.
Let us now make a brief assessment of Mipham's position in the Tibetan religious world by comparing
him to the great luminary Tsong kha pa. Both Tsong kha pa and Mipham are believed by their followers to
be emanations of Buddhas and are known to have had visions of Manjusri. Scholars in their own right, they
have also made almost equal innovative contributions to the study of Buddhism in Tibet and have each
pioneered a scholarly revival. However, Tsong kha pa was no parallel to Mipham in the range of his
knowledge, or at least his writing, on diverse traditional sciences and arts, nor did he earn much authority
and respect in other traditions. Perhaps, Tsong kha pa's lack of influence on other traditions is due to the
general isolation of the de lugs pa tradition from the three other traditions, which enjoy much closer
relations because of the affinity of their philosophical interpretations and practices.
On the other hand, Tsong kha pa occupies an unrivalled supremacy in his own tradition whereas
Mipham, although highly esteemed, is but a secondary figure in his tradition, standing after prominent



'Ju Mi pham Nam rgyal Gya mtsho
193
masters like Padmasambhava (c. 8th century), Rong zom (c. 11th century), Klong chen pa, and sometimes
even 'Jigs med Gling pa (1729-98). Although interest in Mipham is growing so rapidly that he is seen to
represent the rNying ma pa on all fronts, and his predecessors are studied and understood through him, he
will still occupy only a secondary place in the rNying ma lineage. Thus, the religious and scholarly stature
of Mipham and Tsong kha pa, both resemble and differ from each other.
The following judgement of A mdo dGe 'dun Chos 'phel (1903-51) gives a clear picture of the
position of Mipham. When he was asked, who he thinks was more learned, Tsong kha pa or Mipham,
he said:
I thought this over several times. Both of them are equal in their mind for being emanations of the
Buddha and in having visions of Manjuśrī. If both were alive today and had a debate, Tsong kha
pa would, I think, probably be wiser in debate, as he spent longer in dialectical centres. As for
general sagacity, depth of understanding, style of exposition and so forth, Mipham is terrific. If
others hear this, it may vex them. I am being serious.
His popularity and influence in the Tibetan Buddhist world could also partly be ascribed to the appreciation
and approbation he received from his teachers, 'Jam dbyangs mkhyen brtse'i dBang po, Kong sprul Blo gros
mTha' yas, dPal sprul Orgyan 'Jigs med Chos kyi dBang po (1808-87) and mKhan chen Padma Vajra (c.
1800), who were themselves highly esteemed lamas in their days. The first three enjoyed great faith and
devotion from the adherents of gSar ma traditions as pioneers of the ecumenical (ris med movement of which
Mipham too is regarded as a promulgator. Notwithstanding the common assumption that he was an advocate
of the ecumenical movement (ris med pa) which his teachers initiated, Mipham was a staunch proponent of
rNying ma doctrine, and repeatedly refuted other schools igniting new doctrinal controversies. It still remains
a perplexing question whether Mipham was a ris med pa in the same way as Kong sprul and dPal sprul.
The fact that mkhyen brtse'i dBang po encouraged and often instigated Mipham to write treatises that
provoked his opponents into composing refutations is further bewildering. Nonetheless, mKhyen brtse'i
dBang po and Mipham both stood for ris med and expressed this time and again in their words and deeds.
mkhyen brtse'i dBang po's role and stance in the ecumenism he introduced will have to be studied separately,
as it cannot be covered here. As for Mipham, it is clear that his idea of ris med is not of one uniform tradition
for all Tibetan Buddhists but of a harmony with differences, a unity within diversity. He encouraged a ris med
wherein all traditions adhere to their own doctrine and respect others. For him, sharp philosophical
discussions and criticisms could go on, but in a friendly social atmosphere with mutual respect. This is the
ris med attitude he adopted when he argued against such opponents as dPa' ri Blo bzang Rab gsal. One could
probably say that his stature among the gSar ma pa and to some degree among rNying ma pas is a product of
both his socially ris med approach and the polemical elements in his philosophical works.
Mipham's popularity among rNying ma pas, like his renown among adherents of other traditions, grew
gradually. While on the one hand, those rNying ma pas inclined towards solitary practice and esoteric mantra
received Mipham's sūtra and non-soteriological works and his growing influence with scepticism and
indifference, the scholarly Nying ma pas, on the other, doubted the reliability of Mipham's new
interpretations. One rNying ma scholar, rDo grub Dam chos, we are told, even openly challenged Mipham's
interpretation of śāntarakṣita's Madhyamakālamkāra. This resulted in the writing of Dam chos dogs sel, one
of the three polemical writings of Mipham.
Certain later rNying ma writers like mKhan po gZhan dga' and Ngag dga' (1879-1941) seem to have
deliberately chosen to adhere to the better known interpretations of de lugs and Sa skya masters even after
Mipham's new interpretations came to light. Some mKhan pos even argued that Mipham failed to grasp
properly and present the real intentions (dgongs pa) of Rong zom and Klong chen Rab 'byams, major
authorities in the rNying ma tradition. Thus, unlike masters such as the Dalai Lamas, Karmapas and some
Treasure Discoverers, his society did not initially credit him with scholarly talent and spiritual qualities, he
became an adept in his own right, earning his position through a series of impressive academic and
religious performances.



194
Karma Phuntsho
However, one could also say that Mipham acquired an unquestionable seniority in the rNying ma
hierarchy after his master, 'Jam dbyangs mkhyen brtse'i dBang po, the then supreme pontiff of the rNying
ma pas, invested him with the guardianship of the Nying ma doctrine by consigning to his care the entire
corpus of rNying ma literature, including the bka''gyur and bsTan 'gyur canons, mKhyen brtse'i dBang po
conducted a special ceremony in which a huge pile of scriptures was placed before Mipham, who was made
to sit on a raised seat, and was asked from then on to uphold those scriptures by exposition, debate and
composition, and to propagate the Buddha's teachings throughout the world. During this ceremony, mkhyen
brtse'i dBang po also conferred upon Mipham his own pandita hats and the title Mipham 'Jam dbyangs
rNam rgyal Gya mtsho inscribed on a thang ka in poetic verse. This unique enthronement was a milestone
on Mipham's journey to general acceptance and authority within his own tradition.
Although Mipham was not formally recognized as a reincarnate master (sprul sku) or seen as a Treasure
Discoverer (gter ston), his disciples regarded him as an emanation of Manjuśrī. The recognition of his
subsequent reincarnations is still going on in spite of the declaration in his last will that he would not
reincarnate in the impure realm20 any more.21 His followers also later came to see him as a Treasure
Discoverer and all his writings as Mind-Treasures bursting forth spontaneously in the form of treatises
(dgongs gter bstan bcos kyi tshul du rang rdol du byung ba).22 Mipham himself claims that his works,
especially those on profound and sacred topics, were written when words, through the blessing of his deity
and power of his realization, poured out spontaneously costing him no effort.29 Mipham makes another very
strong claim in his will when he says that he is not an ordinary being but a Bodhisattva who has taken birth
through aspiration and prayers.24
Mipham received uncompromising support and recognition from his masters. His chief guru, mKhan
brtse'i dBang po, as mentioned, entrusted him with the guardianship of the Buddha's teachings in general
and rNying ma school in particular. He is also said to have remarked: "At the present time there is no one
on the earth more learned than Lama Mipham".25 Kong sprul Blo gros mTha' yas, another polymathic
teacher of Mipham often called Mipham Mahāpandita and wrote a long-life prayer for Mipham addressing
him as Manjusri.26
When dPal sprul Rin po che was asked who was wiser, Mipham or himself, he replied: "In the field of
sutra, we are roughly equal. In [secret) mantra, there is a difference like that between open and closed eyes.
Mipham is surely wiser" ?? All three of his masters, who were scholars of incredible erudition and adepts
renowned for their lofty realization (rtogs pa), highly applauded his scholarship and associated him with
Manjusri. The recognition he received from his charismatic teachers must have helped him gain influence
and respect among rNying ma pas as well as gSar ma pas.
Another minor asset for Mipham's quick ascent to renown could have been the royal patronage he
enjoyed from the ruling De dge aristocratic family. Although Gene Smith and Steven Goodman assert that
Mipham exercised real temporal authority over his aristocratic disciples28 we do not exactly know as to how
he had such political influence. Nevertheless, it is clear that he wielded strong spiritual authority by being
the spiritual tutor of the sDe dge King Ngag dbang 'Jam dpal Rin chen (c. 1850-1920) and that perhaps may
have brought him some prerogative in both social and political affairs. I shall not, however, discuss this here.
The Writings of Mipham
Mipham's writing career began quite early. Goodman, following Schuh's catalogue, tells us that the first
datable text by Mipham is a single page prayer to Ge sar written on 20 August 1859.29 Traditional scholars
such as mkhan po 'Jigs med Phun tshogs have it that Mipham wrote his Nges shes rin po che'i sgron me
(Precious Lamp of Certainty)30 when he was seven years old for 'Ju Bla ma Rin chen mGon po (c. 1850-
1920)." The book does not however have a proper colophon and is not datable. In his commentary on Nges
shes rin po che'i sgron me, mKhan po Kun dpal (1872-1943), one of the well-known disciples of Mipham,
provides us with a colophon written by Mipham when he was fifty-seven. In it, Mipham says:
Although this Nges shes rin po che'i sgron me was written as it fortuitously came to my mind in
one session when I was very young and a beginner in my studies, there is no contradiction in its



*Ju Mi pham rNam rgyal Gya mtsho
195
content and it holds pithy meaning. Therefore, I leave it as it is, without correction. This
[colophon) is written by Mipham at the age of fifty-seven.92
John Pettit's conjecture that the text probably was written when Mipham was seventeen seems to have no
basis either.
From the middle of the 1860s, Mipham wrote intensively on many topics. Because he travelled from
place to place, residing in different monasteries and hermitages, and gave away what he wrote to various
people who asked for it, his works became widely scattered. Although his major works were published and
disseminated quite quickly, many of his minor works remained in the hands of private people. The proper
compilation of his writings took place after his demise, undertaken by Zhe chen Gyal tshab Padma Nam
rgyal (1871-1926), mKhan po Kun dpal, Bla ma Zhing skyong (c. 1870-1940), and Kah thog Si tu (1880-
1925) who were Mipham's chief disciples.
The collection of Mipham's writings grew gradually to 18 volumes in the Chos mdzod Chen mo
Archives at dPal Idan lHun grub steng, Derge, by the middle of the twentieth century. This did not however
include several other works printed at Zhe chen, Dzogs chen, Kah thog, A 'dzom Chos sgar, dPal 'byor
sgang, Hor La dkar, dpal spungs and rDzong gsar. Some research has been done on the collecting, editing,
and printing of Mipham's works by Gene Smith and Steven Goodman."
Although mKhan po Kun dpal, in his catalogue of Mipham's writings, says that they occupy thirty-two
volumes, corresponding to the thirty-two major marks of the Buddha, only twenty-seven volumes are in the
edition reproduced by Zhe chen Monastery in Kathmandu, which is the largest collection so far available.
Among them, some works like the gNyug sems skor gsum (Trilogy of Innate Mind) are compilations of his
notes and discussions, while others, like his commentary on the Madhyamakāvatāra, are developed from his
annotations. Mipham's literary executors, as he advised, were very scrupulous in including those works
whose authorship cannot be clearly attributed to Mipham. I shall now turn to survey his works contained in
the Zhe chen redaction.
It is a typical Tibetan scholastic style to make a thematic categorization of scholarship, particularly
written works, into two types: vast and profound. Although these two literary characteristics frequently
overlap and could even form indispensable components of a single work, works that deal primarily with
Emptiness are normally considered profound writings and those that focus on other topics "vast writings".
Using this typology, I shall first look at Mipham's works on various other subjects and then focus on his
writings on Madhyamaka philosophy.
The range of Mipham's "vast writings" includes arts, language, politics, astrology, medicine, yoga,
divination, philosophy and religion. In traditional terms, he is a Mahāpandita, having mastered the ten
sciences of arts and crafts (bzo), medicine (gso ba), language (sgra), logico-epistemology (tshad ma) and
soteriology (nang don), poetry (snyan ngag), synonymy (mngon briod), prosody (sdeb sbyor), dramaturgy
(zlos gar) and astrology (dkar rtsis).
Under arts and crafts, mKhan po Kun dpal has catalogued five different works of Mipham written at
the turn of the twentieth century. Four of these are iconometric works wherein Mipham talks in detail about
geometry, mensuration and metrology essential for drawing, painting, casting and sculpting images of
Buddhas and mandalas. In his gZo gnas nyer mkho'i za ma tog (The Receptacle of Useful Crafts) now
published as a separate book, Mipham describes graphology, calligraphy, painting, sculpture, metallurgy,
carpentry, pottery, jewellery, ornamentation, knitting, sewing, embroidery, and the art of making incense,
ink, pens, colours, paints, paintbrushes, of dyeing, plating, decorating, alloying, carving, and of making
herbal pills, fireworks, religious relics etc. Mipham displays great talent and expertise in all these subjects
he wrote and was by no means a bragging charlatan. He treats even minor topics like the art of making inks,
in depth and detail, discussing what kind of materials, containers, temperature and methods should be used
to concoct different varieties of inks.
His contributions in medicine range from commentaries on the four-fold medicinal tantra (rgyud bzhi)
to minor pharmacological notes which were collected by his student, Doctor Karma dGa' ba'i dBang po of
dPal spungs (c. 1870-1930). Covering all pathological, therapeutic and pharmacological aspects of



196
Karma Phuntsho
indigenous medicine, he wrote a few hundred works, of varying size, elucidating ancient theories and
practices and contriving new formulae and methods. Even the concoction of aphrodisiac stimulants did not
escape the creative mind of Mipham. He also took great interest in the synergy of medicine, physiotherapy
and the recitation of powerful mantras. In the colophon of his medicinal works, Mipham refers to himself
as a physician ( tsho byed), although we do not know whether he actually practised medicine. His works, as
Gene Smith correctly states, continue to this day to be highly regarded. His synoptic presentation of
indigenous medicine entitled rТsa rgyud rdil gzhag gi 'grel pa (Commentary on the Outline of the Root
Tantra)" and his treatise on pulse-reading and urinalysis called Phyi ma'i rgyud kyi rtsa mdo chu mdo'i 'grel
pa (Commentary on the Verses on Pulse-Reading and Urinalysis in the Later Tantra) are two of the most
comprehensive medical textbooks for beginners.
Mipham's knowledge of Sanskrit is another prodigious achievement given his lack of direct contact
with the Indian world. He is said to have studied the Cändravyākaranasätra - Candragomin's book on
Sanskrit grammar - with Kong sprul Blo gros mTha' yas. His most notable contribution in the study of
Sanskrit is his Sanskrit-Tibetan dictionary, in which he introduces many Sanskrit Dzogs chen terms. There
is also a collection of his annotations on the Sārasvativyākaranasūtra.40 He also has to his credit
commentaries on Sum cu pa (The Thirty Verses) and rTags kyi 'jug pa, (The Application of Genders) "I the
classic works on Tibetan language and grammar, and his popular treatise on the syntactical use of the
second-suffix "sa" 42 Also within the linguistic field are a short work on semasiology, 47 many sporadic
discussions of semantics in his philosophical writings, and a treatise on letter writing.**
Mipham's talent for prosody and poetry is evident in all his works. Apart from the breath-taking
metaphors and rhetoric in his various writings, he authored a voluminous commentary on Dandin's
Kāvyādarśa. This commentary, as Gene Smith says, is the finest and most credible source for
understanding the development of Tibetan poetics during the 18th and first half of the 19th century. Mipham
wrote no works either on drama or on lexicology except for the bilingual lexicon I have mentioned earlier.
However, he composed some songs and dances, of which the Gling gro, "7 depicting Ge sar and his retinue
of warriors, has now become a famous operatic performance among Tibetans.
The cult of Ge sar was one of Mipham's main interests and here he made a major contribution to folk
tradition. He compiled and edited the multi-volume epic of Ge sar which until then existed solely in oral
form learnt and recited only by a few public narrators. The epic, portraying Ge sar as a reincarnation of
Padmasambhava in the form of a righteous king, describes his various triumphant invasions of the evil
worlds, both human and non-human. It is probably the largest and most beautiful of folk poetry, as opposed
to the poetry derived from Indian sources, and through it runs the theme of the destruction of evil, victory
of the righteous and conversion of bad to good.
Although the legends surrounding Ge sar are shrouded in mystery and are not literally believed by all
Tibetans, historians like Dudjom Rinpoche believed that Ge sar lived in the 11th century as a monarch based
in the region of Gling. Mipham seems to have regarded Ge sar to have lived as a quasi-human figure and
believed that Ge sar and his entourage are now divine spirits who are guardians of the Buddha's teachings
(dharmapāla, chos skyong). Mipham not only adopted Ge sar as his private protector (srung ma), or dgra
lha as he usually referred to him, but also introduced the practice of worshipping Ge sar as a guru and chosen
deity (istadevatā, yi dam). Many of his followers today continue the tradition of worshipping Ge sar as a
dgra tha, who protects them from obstructions on their path to Buddhahood.
Beside compiling and editing the epic of Ge sar, he also wrote a whole cycle of liturgies comprising
prayers, invocations, eulogies and manuals for executing sundry purposes through Ge sar. These include
prayers and praises to Ge sar and his entourage and liturgies for offering them libations, incenses, feasts etc.
There are also supplications requesting them to increase the charisma, wealth, power and fame of their
devotees. Some prayers are directed to particular generals in Ge sar's entourage.
On astrology he wrote around a dozen works. His works in this field range from elementary
mathematical calculations to foretelling eclipses and assessing the positions of the zodiac and stars. In his
monumental two volume commentary on Kalacakralaghutantra," he presents one of the most refined and



'Ju Mi pham Nam rgyal Gya mtsho
197
intricate exposition on astronomical and astrological calculations, often shedding new light on crucial topics.
He wrote a few hundred works on divination, oracles, geomancy, sorcery, magic and similar topics,
including rituals and prayers for various purposes like sang and sur offerings. It is unusual to find a serious
logician and philosopher like Mipham displaying great enterprise in such cultural matters. His technique of
divination using the root mantra Arapacanadhi of Manjuśrī,50 and the one using the arrow of Ge sar, are
two divination methods widely used by rNying ma pas these days.
In this category of study and practice, three large works of Mipham are outstanding. Corresponding to
folk superstitions and beliefs, he wrote gto 'bum, 2 a huge collection of diverse rituals and manuals for
achieving different worldly purposes. Then, there is his Kun gzigs dbyangs 'char chen mo, a work Mipham
seems to have undertaken scrupulously, on the practice of divination based on vital air (rlung), zodiac
positions (khyim) and syllables (dbyangs gsal). Like dByangs 'char, his Srid pa 'phrul gyi 'ju thigS4 is yet
another prodigious work on divination; it mainly deals with an archaic Bon tradition of knot-sortilege.
It is fascinating to see, through this work, the degree of Mipham's interest in and knowledge of Bon,
Tibet's indigenous faith. Perhaps this voluminous work, to which he devoted much effort and time, reading
more than a score of Bon po works, and his work on the art of love-making, 'Dod pa'i bstan bcos 'jig rten
kun tu dga' ba'i gter (Treatise on Love: Treasure of Worldly Pleasure).55 are the two works that best reflect
Mipham's open-mindedness and versatility. In the case of the latter, he was the first of two Tibetans to
compose such a work, although A mdo dGe 'dun Chos 'phel, the other author to write on this topic, jocularly
dismissed Mipham's piece as less efficient because it was written without any practical experience 56
Mipham's cultural works also include what his cataloguer called brTag pa thor bu (Miscellaneous
Investigations). 57 These investigations contain Mipham's study and interpretation of geomantic signs, zodiac
signs, butter-lamp signs, signs of sacrificial fire, signs of spiritual accomplishments, and analysis of good
and bad skulls used for religious rituals and of varieties of jewels. He also wrote on the verification of
genuine and spurious Treasure-Discoverers (gter ston). On magic, he wrote two works, Gyu ma'i be hum
and sNgags kyi be bum, both of which are considered strictly esoteric and thus deliberately kept out of the
Zhechen redaction. The latter has appeared in book format from Xining.
Mipham authored no less than one hundred eulogies and supplications which by traditional
classification fall under the bstod tshogs or hymnic genre. Within this corpus is his remarkable invocation
to the Buddha śākyamuni, Thub chog byin rlabs gter mdzod (Liturgies [to supplicate) the Sage: Treasury of
Blessings) and the grand exposition of the Buddha's lives entitled Padma dkar po (The White Lotus), the
latter being an exegesis supplementary to the former. He wrote similar invocations to the Eight Bodhisattvas
(nye sras brgyad) along with supplementary narratives of their lives.62 Mipham is also said to have compiled
the catalogues to the publication of the mDzod bdun of Klong chen pa, to the writings of Rong zom, to dPal
sprul's works and to the archival collection of Kah thog sku 'bum.
In the gtam tshogs or homiletic genre (zhal gdams skor),63 Mipham wrote over two dozen advisory
epistles and essays addressed to monks, yogis, scholars, rulers, villagers, monastic and lay communities.
Some were written for particular individuals who requested instruction from him whereas others were
written for a general readership. Among these is his political counsel on kingship, rGyal po lugs kyi bstan
bcos sa gzhi skyong ba'i rgyan (Treatise on Kingship: Ornament of Earth Rulers)4 written for the king of
sDe dge.
Mipham's high regard for logic and epistemology is extraordinary in a Nying ma master. Most Nying
ma pas lack interest in and are even averse to logic and epistemology; Mipham professed great love of the
subject. It is perhaps under the influence of Rong zom, who was a great enthusiast for logic and language,
and Klong chen pa, a scholar with a strong sense of rationality, that Mipham acquired his love of rationality
and reasoning. Whatever the cause may be, Mipham is an exceptional case among Nying ma pas in
presenting Buddhist philosophy and soteriology with acute and elaborate reasoning and logic
He wrote commentaries on both the Pramānuvārttika" and the Pramānasamuccaya," in which he put
forward new ideas and interpretations. However, Mipham's position, on the whole, is close to the Sa skya
lineage of the logico-epistemological traditions, and he also wrote a commentary on Sa pan's Tshad ma rigs



198
Karma Phuntsho
gter 67 Among his works on logic is the Bsdus tshan smra bali sgo 'byed (A Compendium that opens the
Door of Speech) a compendium of satirical but intricate logical arguments primarily intended to make fun
of dGe lugs pa sophistry.
Within the logico-epistemological and philosophical works are his contributions to hermeneutics. We
can fully appreciate Mipham's hermeneutic dexterity only by reading his commentaries on major
philosophical treatises and the two sets of short but interesting quintets he wrote and entitled Swords and
Lilies. So far none of these has been studied by western scholars except for Don rnam nges shes rab ral
gri (The Sword of Wisdom that Ascertains Meaning), one of the five Swords, of which Mathew Kapstein
has made a paraphrastic presentation. An English translation of mKhan po dPal Idan Shes rab's
commentary on the same text is put on the Web.?!
Generally speaking, most of Mipham's literary output could be linked to a soteriological purpose, while
over half of it directly deals with Buddhist philosophy and soteriology. Among the Five Scriptural Texts
(gzhung bka' pod Inga) popular in the Tibetan academia, Mipham has written least on vinaya. He has to his
credit a commentary on the Prātimokşasūtra, "2 the õryamulasarvāstivādiśrāmanerakārikā," and the
Upāsakasanvarāsaka. Similarly, of the Thirteen Great Texts (gzhung chen bcu gsum) known among
rNying ma, ba' brgyud and Sa skya scholarly circles, Mipham did not write a commentary on the
Vinayasūtra of Gunaprabha and on one other text, the Catuhsataka of Aryadeva. Does writing less on vinaya
in any way reflect Mipham's lack of interest in monastic practice, as is the case with some rNying ma
masters? We have no record either of Mipham's being ordained as a proper monk. I will not, however, delve
into this question here.
On Abhidharma, Mipham wrote an expansive commentary on the Abhidharmakosa" and a glossarial
exegesis on the Abhidharmasamuccaya.76 He also commented on Asanga's Mahāyānasangraha,??
Vasubandhu's Vyakhyāyukti, Trimsikā" and Vimsatikā.On Buddhist phenomenology and metaphysics,
his treatise, mKhas pa'i tshul la 'jug pa'i sgo (Entering the Ways of the Wise) with its outline (sa bcad) and
verse summary (sdom byang)," is one of the most comprehensive books and is much studied in the three
non-dGe lugs pa schools. This and his outline of the Abhidharmakośa both reflect Mipham's skill in
organizing the structure of his works. Steven Goodman and Leslie Kawamura have done a synoptic analysis
of Mipham's mKhas jug, and a volume of English translation of the same by Eric Pema Kunsang and
another by Richard Barrons have come out.83
Of the five works of Maitreya, Mipham wrote quite detailed commentaries on three, but on the
Abhisamavälamkära and the Mahāyānottaratantra, otherwise known as the Ratnagotravibhāga, there are
only commentaries later compiled from his annotations by his students. His commentaries on the
Süträlankära, entitled Theg mchog bdud rtsi'i dga'ston (The Feast of the Nectar of the Supreme Vehicle),85
on the Madhyāntavibhanga called 'Od zer phreng ba (The Garland of Rays) and on the
Dharmadharmatavibhanga, called Ye shes snang ba rnam 'byed (Discriminating the Light of Pristine
Wisdom), are very fine works; the first two, specially, are excellent sources for his understanding of
Cittamātra philosophy.
Of the five, Mipham seems to have considered the Madhyāntavibhanga and Dharmadharmatavibhanga
to encompass all Mahāyāna schools, unlike Abhisamayalankāra and Mahāyānottaratantra, which he
considered to be Madhyamika in content, and the Sütrālankära which he considered to be Cittamätra. In
addition to his commentary on the Mahāyānottaratantra, he wrote two supplementary works on Buddha
Nature called bDe gshegs snying po'i stong thun senge'i nga ro, (Exposition on Tathāgatagarbha: Lion's
Roar)88 wherein he discusses the three arguments Maitreya used to establish that Buddha Nature pervades
in all sentient beings, and gZhan stong khas len sen ge'i nga ro (Assertion of the Emptiness of Other: Lion's
Roar) a text written in defence of the exposition of the Emptiness of Other. I shall return to say more on
this in the next section when I discuss his works on Madhyamaka.
Like other Tibetan masters, Mipham emphasized śāstras and did not write much directly on the
canonical sūtras. There are only four commentaries on the sūtras: on the Prātimokşasūtra, I mentioned
earlier, on the Āryaratnatrayanusmytisūtra," on the Prajñāpāramitasamuccayagātha and an annotation of



'Ju Mi pham Nam rgyal Gya mtsho
199
the Bhadracaripranidhana." On the Sancayagāthā, he wrote a second exegesis in the shan byar genre, 94 by
juxtaposing and collating this sūtra and Maitreya's Abhisamayālamkāra. Among other miscellaneous works
on sūtrayāna are his commentary on Nägarjuna's Suhrllekha,95 which has been translated into English in
Leslie Kawamura's Golden Zephyr, his Yid bzhin mdzod grub bsdus (Compendium of Tenet Systems
(presented) in the Treasury of Wish-fulfilling Jewels) extracted from the twelfth chapter of Klong chen pa's
Yid bzhin rin po che'i mdzod (Treasury of Wish-fulfilling Jewels)98 and his essay on establishing the three
vows to be of a single nature."
His output in subjects related to the vajrayāna system is massive, comprising around seven hundred
works of varying size. Besides writing new philosophical treatises and commentaries to the existing ones,
he composed hundreds of accomplishment practices, invocations, meditation manuals, and liturgies for
empowerment, consecration, and numerous other purposes. He dealt with all the four schools of tantras -
kriyā, carya, yoga and yogottaratantra - or the six mantra vehicles of kriyā, carya, yoga, mahāyoga,
anuyoga and atiyoga according to the rNying ma tantric taxonomy.
Among the scores of deities he dealt with, Mipham apparently wrote most on practices based on
multiple forms of Manjuśrī, his tutelary deity. His cycle of Manjusri worship contains eulogies, prayers,
invocations, accomplishment manuals, meditation instructions, and liturgies for bestowing empowerments,
performing divination, sorcery, magic, oracles, exorcism, and consecration, making offerings and even
making blessed pills, amulets, etc.
A notable feature of Mipham's contribution on vajrayāna is his interest and erudition in what are
categorised as gSar ma or New Tantras. Unlike many rNying ma masters, who were satisfied with the
rNying ma tantras translated during the Earlier Translation (snga 'gyur) undertaken at the time of first
propagation of Buddhism into Tibet under Dharma King Khri srong IDe btsan and Padmasambhava,
Mipham actively studied and wrote prolifically on the gSar ma tantras, which were translated during the
Later Translation (phyi 'gyur) period, which was part of the second dissemination of Buddhism in Tibet.
Among his works on gSar ma tantras are his numerous accomplishment manuals (sgrub thabs) and
liturgical compositions on the Bhairava, Hevajra, Vajrayogini, Guhyasamaja, Cakrasanvara and Kālacakra
practices. On the last one, Mipham produced one of the finest commentarial exegeses on the Laghutantra 100
and, in addition to the two thick volumes of commentary, another volume of liturgical writings and diverse
essays.10 Time and again Mipham praised the effectiveness and profundity of the Kālacakra cycle and
reaffirmed its superiority over other tantras, 102 or at least over other gSar ma tantras. He also wrote two
works on the Pancakrama (Rim Inga) of the Guhyasamāja cycle. 103
If Mipham treated the gSar ma teachings with deep interest, he certainly could be said to have
undertaken the study of and writing on rNying ma doctrine with zeal and zest. He is said to have remarked
that the gSar ma works are easy to understand and immediately convincing whereas rNying ma teachings.
on the contrary, are abstruse and obscure but pithy and profound, requiring to be unravelled gradually. 104
Mipham wrote profusely on Nying ma tantras. Of the two, bka'ma and g Ter ma, it is curious that Mipham,
apart from his scrutiny of authentic and spurious gter stons, did not discuss gTer malo much, compared to
the bulk of work he did on bka' ma. 106 Although he was closely connected to great gTer stons like 'Jam
dbyangs mkhyen brtse'i dBang po and Kong sprul Blo gros mTha' yas, and despite the compilation of Rin
chen gter mdzod chen mo happening in his day, Mipham seems to show little interest in any gTer ma cycle.
Amongst his important compositions on Nying ma tantric scholarship, his exegetical, liturgical and
instructional writings on bka brgyad 07 are outstanding contributions to the sgrub sde section of
Mahāyogatantra. Likewise, his gSang snying spyi don 'od gsal snying po (The Essence of Clear Light: An
Exegesis on Guhyagarbhatantra), 10 among several others, is a remarkable contribution to the rgyud sde
category of Mahayoga literature, although in it he interpreted the Guhyagarbhatantra in the light of the
Atiyoga tradition.
He has also written supplementary works to Klong chen pa's Yid bzhin rin po che' mdzod
and commentaries on Padmasambhava's Man ngag Ita phreng, Hunkāra's Samsiddhimahasriherukanopika,''
Manjuśrīmitra's Bodhicittabhāvanopalasuvarmadruta,"2 Saraha's Dohakośagiti," Pad ma dBang rgyal's



200
Karma Phuntshot
sDom gsum rnam nges, 14 on the Dhyānottaratantra, Tshig bdun gsol 'debs, 16 Gyud lung man ngag gi
bshags pall7 and other tantric treatises, some of which could be considered to be his work on anuyogatantra,
the second inner tantric vehicle in rNying ma tradition. There are also his prayers, invocations, guru yoga
practices directed to many saints and yogis of India and Tibet and liturgies for supplicating and for offering
feasts, libations, incense etc. to different deities and dharma-protectors. He also authored around fifteen
works which his cataloguer classifies as benedictory and dedicatory prayers.
Foremost among his contributions are his quintessential writings on rDzogs chen thought and practice.
He wrote a few exegetical works and many practical instructions, which were published as his distinctive
writings on rDzogs chen at rDzong sar monastery. 18 A similar collection was also reproduced as a book at
Sarnath.119 Apart from his independent texts on rDzogs chen, he also gave ample thematic treatment to
rDzogs chen philosophy and meditation in many other works, especially in those on Madhyamaka.
His writings on rDzogs chen, like Klong chen pa's but unlike 'Jigs med Gling pa's poetic presentation,
are pithy and abstruse, often encrypted in rDzogs chen terminology, and, like Rong zom's, firmly grounded
on philosophical reasoning. One could claim that Mipham undertook all his work on soteriology and
philosophy in the spirit of mastering rDzogs chen thought, for rDzogs chen was to him, as to other rNying
ma pas, the summum bonum of all teachings and practices. If anything made him a staunch adherent of
rNying ma school, it was the rDzogs chen, and it was mainly to fulfil this end of perfecting Great Perfection
that Mipham expounded Madhyamaka philosophy extensively. I shall now turn to survey his works on
Madhyamaka, the "profound writings".
The Madhyamaka Writings
Of all his writings, his writings on Madhyamaka thought attracted the most attention from other scholars and
bought popularity and fame in religious and scholarly circles. It is on this subject, among the numerous
subjects he covered that Mipham showed the most enthusiasm and vigour, and came up with much novelty
and also dissent. Both the popularity of the subject in Tibet and the innovative but controversial nature of
his writings contributed towards making his works on Madhyamaka distinctive and famous.
Perhaps the earliest work that Mipham wrote on Madhyamaka is his Nges shes rin po che'i sgron me, 120
which as mentioned earlier, was written at an initial period of his advanced training. John Pettit has recently
done his Ph.D. thesis on this text, providing an insightful account of Mipham's position in Madhyamaka
thought as presented in this text.121 He has also produced an English translation of this and its commentary,
rNam bshad 'od zer dri med (Exegesis (called) the Stainless Rays) by Khro shul 'Jam Dor (1920-60).122 In
this text, Mipham portrays himself as a judicious sage to whom a wandering mendicant poses seven crucial
questions relating to Madhyamaka.
Through giving answers to the seven queries, he expounds various aspects of Madhyamaka philosophy,
and explicates the crux of it, especially while answering the first question, whether Emptiness is strong or
weak negation (Ita ba dgag gnyis gang Itar smra), and the last question, whether or not there is assertion in
the Mädhyamika system (dbu mar khas lan yod dam med). The coherence and consistency with which he
provides answers to these questions, thereby elucidating the rNying ma doctrinal position, gives us an
impressive picture of Mipham's erudition even at that early stage of his scholarship.
However, we see Mipham's exposition of Madhyamaka growing more elaborate, profound and rigorous
in his commentary on the Madhyamakālankāra of Santaraksita, 123 written when he was thirty-one. At the
behest of his chief master, 'Jam dbyangs mkhyen brtse dBang po, he composed, within only twenty-one
days, a stupendous exegesis on this Madhyamaka text, previously to a great extent neglected by Tibetan
scholars. In his detailed commentary on the main body of the text and the extensive, systematic introduction
he wrote to the commentary, he formulated the rNying ma doctrinal position corresponding to both the
Svātantrika and the Prasangika traditions of Madhyamika. For posterity, this commentary was to become his
most authoritative work on subjects relating to Madhyamaka studies and the most important source for his
interpretation of several controversial topics. Kennard Lipman has done his dissertation on this. 124



'Ju Mi pham rNam rgyal Gya mtsho
201
Connected to this work is Mipham's short polemic entitled Dam chos dwogs sel (Clarification of Doubts
of Damchos),125 written at the request of rDo ba Damn chos, a rNying ma scholar who at first seems even to
have challenged Mipham to a public debate. In 1878, two years after his commentary on the
Madhyamakālamkāra, Mipham wrote Sher le'u 'grel pa nor bu ketaka (Commentary on Wisdom Chapter: the
Ketaka Gem), 126 his exposition on the ninth chapter of the Bodhicaryāvatāra of säntideva, which, in the years
to come, was to provoke several controversies and polemical discussions. This commentary, as Gene Smith
has correctly said, turned into a tempest that triggered an intellectual commotion in dGe lugs pa circles.127
The dGe lugs pas retaliated by sending him several refutations of his work, which subsequently led to
the writing of his two other polemical works, Rigs lam rab gsal de nyid snang byed (The Clear Logic that
Illuminates the Reality),128 written in reply to the refutation of dPa' riba Blo bzang Rab gsal, and Gal lan
nyin byed snang ba (Reply to a Refutation: The Light of the Sun)29 to Brag dkar sPrul sku Blo bzang dPal
Idan bs Tan 'dzin sNyan grags. These three works and three subsequent polemical texts embody almost the
entire contributions of Mipham in Madhyamaka philosophy and thus form the magna opera of Mipham's
writings on Madhyamaka
Major issues on which Mipham shed new light in these works are: the nature of Emptiness, its
knowability and inexpressibility, the definition of the two truths, classification of the ultimate truth, the dual
system of the two truth theory, differences between Svātantrika and Prāsangika sub-schools, the
Mādhyamika stance on reflexive awareness and store-consciousness, the process of discarding the two
obscurations, the degree of realization of Selflessness by śrāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas, the Prasangika
position in making assertions, the mode of reasoning and meditation on Emptiness, the validity of
convention and the scrutiny of shared appearance (mthun snang) among the six realms of beings. Paul
Williams, in his book The Reflexive Nature of Awareness, 10 has done an elaborate study of Mipham's
Mādhyamika stance on reflexive awareness (svasamvedana, rang rig) and a Franz-Karl Ehrhard has written
on Mipham's theory of assertions in Prasangika school.!!!
Mipham covered in these texts philosophical, soteriological, gnoseological and ontological issues that
most writers on Madhyamaka would deal within commentaries on Candrakirti's Madhyamakāvatāra or
Nāgārjuna's Mülamadhyamakakärikä. One often wonders why Mipham, apart from his annotations that his
students later compiled for us, did not write a proper commentary on those two, but wrote on
Madhyamakalaikära. Could this be because of his greater faith in śāntarakṣita, as he was a Nying ma
master? Similarly, he did not write an extensive commentary on the Abhisamayalankara and
Mahāyānottaratantra, as did other masters, but wrote on other works of Maitreya. Perhaps, Mipham was
deliberately avoiding comment on those popular texts that already had a great deal of scholarly work done
on them, and was trying to bring some less known works to light. Or was Mipham trying to avoid the risk
of more controversy, which would be inevitable if he undertook elaborate exposition on those books that are
widely studied in Tibetan monasteries?
One important characteristic of Mipham's writing is his ecumenical spirit of reconciliation. Although
his controversial contributions and the related polemics make him appear disputatious and provocative,
Mipham was a master who fervently sought to reconcile and respect all conflicting views and systems. It
was his liberal approach, interpreting dissonant teachings so as to bring them into harmony, which often
annoyed and provoked opposition from orthodox groups. His effort to bring dichotomic systems, such as the
Profound tradition of Nagarjuna (Klu sgrub kyi zab mo Ita srol) and the Extensive tradition of Asanga (Thogs
med kyi rgya chen spyod srol), the Svätantrika and Prāsangika Madhyamaka, sütrayana and vajrayāna, the
gSar ma and rNying ma and even Tsong kha pa and his opponents, into agreement is evident in his
Madhyamaka works.
Besides, Mipham respected every Buddhist tradition and its masters and even accepted their spiritual
and doctrinal authority, notwithstanding his philosophical disagreements with his opponents. A salient
example is Mipham's devotion to Tsong kha pa and some other de lugs pa masters, despite the fact that
many of his polemical writings are refutations of Tsong kha pa's interpretation and dGe lugs pa
understanding of Emptiness. He repeatedly stated that Tsong kha pa and other eminent de lugs pa masters



202
Karma Phuntsho
like ICang skya Rol pa'i rDo rje (1717-1786) held views consonant with the rNying ma pa and other sNga
rabs pal3 viewpoints, although they taught a provisional understanding of Emptiness that their followers,
the de lugs pas, mistook for definitive and final.
A strong testimony to Mipham's ecumenical outlook is that he even wrote commentaries on Tsong kha
pa's Lam gtso rnam gsum (Three Principal Practices)'34 and ICang sKya's ITa mgur (Hymn on the
Experience of Emptiness).135 In the same way, he wrote a short article defending the Sa skya pa
philosophical position in answer to twelve pivotal questions posed to the Sa skya pas 36 and he wrote his
gZhan stong khas len senge'i nga ro to justify the view of the Emptiness of Other (gzhan stong) although
he himself adhered to the concept of the Emptiness of Own-being (rang stong).
Now to turn to his doctrine on Tathāgatagarbha, Mipham touches on the concept of Tathāgatagarbha
in the above mentioned works, although it is his commentary on the Mahāyānottaratantra, and the
supplementary writings, bDe gshegs snying po'i stong thun senge'i nga ro17 and gZhan ston khas len
senge'i nga ro, 138 which deal with this topic in depth and detail. Towards the end of his life, Mipham also
composed three other works on Tathāgatagarbha and Innate Mind (gnyug sems), called the Trilogy on
Innate Mind.119 Unfortunately, Mipham did not live long enough to see a formal completion of this trilogy;
his student, Zhe chen Gyal tshab Pad ma rNam rgyal, finished it by augmenting miscellaneous notes by
Mipham on the same theme and published it at Zhe chen monastery. In this trilogy, he bridges the
Tathāgatagarbha in sūtrayāna and the Innate Mind in vajrayāna and goes on to show how this concept is
fundamental and crucial to Mahāyāna philosophy and practice irrespective of what terms are used for it in
different schools and vehicles. This, one could say, is one of his last attempts to harmonize not only the sutra
and tantra schools in their basic theory and ultimate goal but the positions of various Buddhist traditions and
schools with respect to Tathāgatagarbha.
Other works of Mipham on Madhyamaka include his commentaries on Nāgārjuna's
Pratityasamutpādahrdayal40 and Hastavālal41 and śāntideva's Bodhicaryāvatāra, 142 although the last two are
not included in the Zhechen Monastery edition of his writings. Mipham did not write anything on
Aryadeva's Catuhsataka, one of the major treatises of Madhyamaka in Tibet, but he wrote a commentary on
the Jñānasārasamuccaya, 13 believed to be by the same Aryadeva. Katsumi Mimaki has written an article on
this in French.144 Mipham wrote around half a dozen practical instructions for meditation on Madhyamaka,
of which two have been rendered into English in the book, Calm and Clear,145 published by the Tibetan
Nyingma Meditation Center.
His student gZhan phan Chos kyi Blo gros (c. 1890-1960) compiled his miscellaneous notes on
Madhyamaka philosophy and created a collection entitled dBu ma sogs gzhung spyi'i dka' gnad skor gyi
gsung gros sna tsogs phyogs gcig tu bsdus pa rin po che'i za ma tog (Collection of Diverse Discussions on
Madhyamaka and Other Difficult Doctrinal Topics: the Vessel of Jewels).146 Most of notes in this and in his
annotation of Madhyamakāvatāra are refutations of the dGe lugs pa understanding of Emptiness as lack of
inherent nature and the phrase "vase is not empty of vase but of hypostatic existence". It is also in this text
where he categorically claims to be a proponent of rang stong philosophy, introduces the terms, kun rdzob
gzhan stong and don dam gzhan stong, which in his Nges shes sgron me, he calls tshig gi gzhan stong and
don gi gzhan stong, and accuses the dGe lugs pas of espousing the first type of gzhan stong.
One of Mipham's last wishes was to write another extensive exegetical work on Madhyamaka. This
wish however was not fulfilled, due to his physical deterioration and because of the number of pending
works to be completed. From the nature of his works and the degree of his emphasis, it is clear that
Madhyamaka was for Mipham a profound and crucial subject, deserving more attention than any other in
the sūtrayāna. The correct understanding of Madhyamaka qua Emptiness was not only an indispensable
soteriological factor in itself but a direct link to the knowledge of rDzogs chen. In many of his works,
Mipham stressed this connection between rDzogs chen and Madhyamaka and went so far to deny that one
could master rDzogs chen without adequate knowledge of Madhyamaka.
In his Nges shes sgron me, he says: "In order to scrutinize thoroughly the Primordial Purity, 17 one has
to perfect the view of Prasangika,"148 and also in his commentary on the Madhyamakāvatāra, he states: "The



'Ju Mi pham Nam rgyal Gya mtsho
203
Great Perfection [view], which realizes the equality of appearance and emptiness, could be seen only by
means of the excellent treatises of Nāgārjuna."149
This was a bold claim for him to make, especially as a rNying ma pa, because many yogic rNying ma
pas in his milieu regarded themselves as rDzogs chen adepts although they were not really versed in
Madhyamaka philosophy. More disconcerting to such rNying ma pas was his opinion that full knowledge of
Madhyamaka can be gained only in the light of sufficient pramūna understanding. Like the dGe lugs pas,
Mipham argued that knowing pramāna concepts is a prerequisite for mastering Madhyamaka philosophical
theories and propositions.
In his commentary on the Madhyamakālankāra, he stated that Santarakṣita's text was particularly meant
for a Madhyamika who has a strong interest in and taste for pramāna. In the same text, he introduced the
concept of dbu tshad sen ge mjing hsnol, the coalition of Madhyamaka principle and pramāna logic,
represented by two lions intertwining their necks to guard each other. Thus, Mipham revolutionized rNying
ma scholarship by not only encouraging philosophical learning and exposition but by emphasizing the
rational, analytical and zetetic approach of learning and pedagogy,
Through his writings on Madhyamaka, of all his contributions, he left for future rNying ma pas what
they could consider as assertions of their own tradition (rang lugs kyi dod pa) or philosophical boundaries
to hold (gzhung gi 'dzin mtshams). In this respect, Mipham fulfilled his goal in writing commentaries, for it
was partly to make the rNying ma pas, who were then heavily dependent on other traditions, self-reliant in
their doctrinal field that Mipham undertook the writing of his works. He repeatedly admonishes the rNying
ma pas to stop relying on other schools for philosophical and doctrinal positions while so much goodness is
treasured in the rNying ma tradition itself. With this message, he encourages the rNying ma pas and for that
matter any other scholars and practitioners to develop twofold certainties in the teachings: a certainty
through which one need not rely on others anymore (gzhan dring mi jog pa'i nges shes) and a certainty
which cannot be invalidated by others anymore (gzhan gyis mi 'phrogs pa'i nges shes). These dual
certainties form a common theme in many of his works.
Mipham's output in Madhyamaka redefined, for the rNying ma pas, their perspective on Madhyamaka
scholarship and their scholastic modalities by pointing out both strengths and weaknesses, while it proved a
stimulus for other traditions of Tibetan Buddhism to reassess and reconstruct their doctrinal positions. For
general Tibetan scholarship, it rejuvenated the long history of polemical debate and thereby gave fresh life
to the study of Madhyamaka in Tibet.
Conclusion
If we look at the massive collection of his writings, it appears as though Mipham can have done nothing but
spend his entire life writing books. Yet, according to his colophons, Mipham wrote most of his works only
during the intervals of his teaching sessions or meditation retreats, the two activities that occupied him most.
Thus, it is not just the depth and amount of what he knew that amaze people, but the speed at which he
mastered and composed that make him a distinguished prodigy.
His polymathy, although extremely diverse, was never short of intellectual acumen, and the socially
ecumenical outlook he professed did not undermine his philosophically critical approach. With a strong
soteriological conviction and devotion to meditation, he could still pursue his interests in what his tradition
would consider profane sciences. He instigated doctrinal dissension and yet was respected for the
conciliatory movement of which he was a prominent leader. He was open minded, abiding strictly by reason
and logic, and yet he adhered to his own tradition with fervent faith.
Mipham was and still is a personal enigma, whose fascinating life and works deserve much more
careful study and research. He is sui generis. To his followers, he is just another Manjuśrī, the Bodhisattva
who comes now and then to help the ignorant and the scholarly, but for the wider world. I suppose, he is a
"renaissance man" to a degree rarely seen in history.



204
Karma Phuntsho
Bibliography
MGS Mi pham Gya mtsho'i gSung 'bum, Nepal: Zhechen Monastery, 1987. This collection, compiled by
H. H. Dilgo Khentse Rinpoche, consists of twenty-seven volumes as of 2000. The redaction is
originally based on the sDe dge collection of Mipham's writings and those printed in other monasteries
are added to it. The volumes are marked: Om, Aḥ, Ra, Pa, Tsa, Na, Dhi, Shri, Hüm, E, Wam, Ka, Kha,
Ga, Nga, Ca, Cha, Ja, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 and 27.
Dudjom Rinpoche, Gyurme Dorje and Mathew Kapstein (trs.) (1991): The Nyingma School of Tibetan
Buddhism. Boston: Wisdom Publications
Goodman, Steven M. (1981): "Mi Pham rgya mtsho: An Account of His Life, the Printing of his Works, and
the Structure of his Treatise Entitled mKhas pa'i tshul la 'jug pa'i sgo", in Ronald M. Davidson (ed.)
Wind Horse: Proceedings of the North American Tibetological Society, Asian Humanities Press
'Ju Mi pham Nam rgyal Gya mtsho, (1993): sPyod 'jug sher 'grel ketaka, Chengdu: Sichuan People's
Publishing House
- and Kun bzang dPal Idan, (1997): Nges shes sgron me rtsa 'grel, Chengdu: Sichuan People's
Publishing House
Kun bzang Chos grags, Gangs ri'i khrod kyi smra ba'i sen ge gcig pu 'jam mgon mi pham rgya mtsho'i mam
thar snying po bsdus pa, MGS, vol. Hum, 621-729
dPa' ri Blo bzang Rab gsal, (1991): Yongs rdzogs bstan pa'i mnga' bdag sudhisara'i gsung 'bum, Beijing:
National Centre for Tibetan Studies Press
Pettit, John Whitney (1999): Mipham's Beacon of Certainty: Illuminating the Dzogchen View, Boston:
Wisdom Publications
Smith, E. Gene (1969): "Introduction to 'Jam mgon Mi pham Gya mtsho, gZhan gyis brtsad pa'i lan mdor
bsdus pa rigs lam rab gsal de nyid snang byed, Gangtok: Ngagyur Nyingmay Sungrab
Notes
1. Dag snang (lit. pure visions) and dgongs gter (lit. mind treasures) are revelations known primarily in the rNying
ma school of Tibetan Buddhism. They form a large section of the gTer ma cycle, the corpus of rediscovered
teachings believed to be hidden for safety by Padmasambhava and his disciples in the gih century. Although dag
snang and dgongs gter were not unknown before, both began to thrive intensely in the 18ih and 19th century through
visionaries like 'Jigs med Gling pa and 'Jam dbyangs mkhyen brtse'i dBang po.
2. Ris med or the Ecumenical movement was started in the nineteenth century by the luminaries, 'Jam dbyangs
mKhyen brtse'i dBang po and Kong sprul Blo gros mTha' yas in order to reconcile the differing Buddhist schools
which have brought decades of strife in Tibet. Since then, this movement spread widely. H.H. the 14th Dalai Lama
is perhaps the strongest promulgator of this movement today.
3. E. Gene Smith, (1969), p. 6.
4. Steven D. Goodman, (1981), pp. 58-78.
5. John W. Pettit, (1998): "Theory, Practice and Ultimate Reality in the Thought of Mipham Rinpoche" (Ph.D. thesis,
Columbia Univ.,), pp. 32-64; John W. Pettit, "The Life and Works of Mipham Rinpoche" at website:
http://www.hvinet.com/jwp/Miphambio.html. See also John W. Pettit (1999).
6. Dieter Schuh, (1973): Tibetische Handschriften und Blockdrucke, Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag,
vol. XI 5.
7. Bo dong Pan chen Phyogs las rNam rgyal is credited with around hundred and fifty volumes of work. The works,
grouped into four De nyid bsdus pas (Compendiums on Reality), are mostly compilations of the works of his
predecessors.
8. Giving titles like Kun mkhyen, Kun gzigs and Thams cad mkhyen pa to a particular master normally happens only
within his own tradition and may not be acceptable to the adherents of other traditions. However, certain masters
of established scholarly renown are accorded the title even beyond their own tradition. In the case of Mipham,
although the practice of addressing him as kun mkhyen may be common only among his followers, it is not totally
unacceptable to others to call him Kun mkhyen. Even dGe lugs pas would perhaps agree that Mipham is a Kun
mkhyen as much as 'Jam dbyangs bZhad pa is.
9. I credit Alak Zengkar Rinpoche for this information.



'Ju Mi pham Nam rgyal Gya mtsho
205
10. E. Gene Smith, (1969), p. 5.
11. Pa' ri Blo bzang Rab gsal, (1991): "Jam dpal dbyangs kyi dgongs rgyan rigs pa'i gzi 'bar gdong Inga'i sgra
dbyangs". Yongs rdzogs bstan pa'i mnga' bdag sudhisara'i gsung 'bum, Beijing: National Centre for Tibetan
Studies Press. p. 356; Brag sprul bsTan 'dzin sNyan grags, Zab mo dbu ma'i gnad cung zad brjod pa blo gsal dga'
ba'i gtam zhes bya mi pham rnam rgyal la klan ka gyis pa dang po (Works of Brag dkar sPrul sku bsTan 'dzin
sNyan grags, copy in IsMEO, Rome, vol. Ca, 274/5); See also MGS, vol. Ca, pp. 195-7.
12. 'Jigs med Phun tshogs, Kun mkhyen Mi pham rgya mtsho la gsol ba 'debs tshul gyul las ram par rgyal ba'i mga
sgra (n.p. n.d.)
13. Brag dkar sPrul sku wrote two other works to refute Mipham's reply to his first refutation. Jam dbyangs miam rgyal
gyis dod ishul la klan ka bgyis pu zab mo'i glam (Works of Brag sprul bsTan dzin sNyan grags, copy in IsMEO,
Rome, vol. Ca, 274/6) and Mi pham mam rgyal gyis rtsod pa'i yang lan log la'l khong khrag'don pali skyug sman
(Works of Brag dkar sPrul sku bs Tan 'dzin sNyan grags, copy in IsMEO, Rome, vol. Ca, 274/7).
14.dPa' ri Blo bzang Rab gsal, (1991): "Rigs 'phrul spyid kyi pho nya", Yongs rdzogs bstan pa'i mnga' bdag
sudhisara'i gsung 'bum, Beijing: National Centre for Tibetan Studies Press, pp. 350-353: Kun bzang Chos grags,
(1987), pp. 646-7: See also MGS, vol. Ca, pp. 463-64. Mipham and dPa'ri Rab gsal later became good friends, who
frequently wrote and visited each other.
15. Mipham's works were studied in Ka'brgyud and Sa skya institutions mainly for his dextrous style of presentation,
consistent arguments or for providing deeper insight. gZhan dga' is studied because his commentaries are mainly
compilations of original Indian glosses and annotations, which are considered unaffected by linear Tibetan
interpretations and thus accepted by all traditions of Tibetan Buddhism,
16. A mdo de 'dun Chos 'phel, a scholar of great brilliance, was a Nying ma reincarnate educated in the de lugs pa
centre of 'Bras spungs. He had great respect and faith in Tsong kha pa although his polemical work on Madhyamaka
made him infamous among dGe lugs pa scholars.
17. Shes rab Gya mtsho, (1988): "A mdo badge 'dun chos 'phel gyi mdzad ram", dGe 'dun chos 'phel gyi gsung
rtsom, Bir: Dzongsar Shedra, vol ii, p. 378: go de ngas bsam blo mang po mang po bang rgyu byung / khong gnyis
thugs sangs rgyas kyi rnam 'phrul la 'jam dpal zhal gzigs pa 'dra 'dra red / deng sang gnyis ka bzhugs yod na/rtsod
pa zhig mdzad na rje rin po che grwa skor rgyun ring mdzad tsang mkhas pa mi yong ngam snyam gyi yod / rtsa
ba'i rigs pa'i rtsal dang / go stobs bshad stangs sogs mi pham 'jigs gi/gzhan gyi go na dgongs pa 'gal yong/ngas
ngo ma bshad ni yin/
18. The Pandita hat is an insignia of scholarship and high spiritual status in the Nying ma school. Its use is normally
reserved for senior mKhan pos.
19. Kun bzang Chos grags, (1987), p. 643: Om svasti jayantu / mi pham mgon po'i dgongs don ji bzhin rtogs // 'jam
dpal dbyang bzhin shes bya kun la mkhas // phyogs las rnam rgyal chos kyi grags pa llar // snyan pas rgya mtsho'i
gos can khyab gyur cig // "Om! May it be auspicious and victorious! [You have realized the meaning of the
intentions of Maitreya (Mipham) (and you are] wise in all fields of knowledge like Manjusrighosa ("Jam dpal
dbyangs). Being victorious (rNam rgyal) from (all) directions like Dharmakirti, may (your) fame pervade the earth
(rGya mtsho'i gos can)". See also Dudjom Rinpoche, (1991), vol. ii, p. 875.
20. Impure realms, here refers to the samsaric realms like this world in contrast to the pure Buddha fields like
Sukhāvati.
21. Kun bzang Chos grags. (1987), p. 661; Dudjom Rinpoche. (1991), vol. I, p. 879.
22. Ibid., p. 654; Dudjom Rinpoche, (1991). vol. ii, p. 877.
23. Ibid., p. 641: Dudjom Rinpoche. (1991), vol. ii, p. 874.
24. Ibid., p. 659; Dudjom Rinpoche. (1991), vol.ii. p. 878.
25. Ibid., p. 644: da Ita'i dus 'dir sa'i steng na bla ma mi pham las mkhas pa med 7. See also Dudjom Rinpoche, (1991),
vol. ii, p. 875.
26. Ibid., p. 644: Dudjom Rinpoche, (1991), vol. ii, p. 875.
27. Ibid., p. 645-46: dpal sprul rin po cher/bla ma mi pham dang khyed gnyis su mkhas zhus par / mdo phyogs langed
gnyis phyogs 'dra tsam yin/ sngags la mig phye btsum tsam gyi khyad yod / bla ma mi pham rang mkhas gsungs/
28. Steven D. Goodman, (1981), p. 64.
29. Ibid., p. 60; Dieter Schuh, (1973): Tibetische Handschriften und Blockdrucke, Wiesbaden, Franz Steiner Verlag, vol.
XI 5. p. 157.
30. MGS, vol. Shri, pp. 71-123; 'Ju Mi pham and Kunzang dPal Idan, (1997): Nges shes sgron me rtsa 'grel. Chengdu:
Sichuan People's Publishing House,



206
Karma Phuntshot
31. 'Jigs med Phun tshogs, Kun mkhyen mi pham rgya mtsho la gsol ba 'debs tshul gyullas mam par rgyal ba'i mga
sgra (n.p. n.d.).
32. Ju Mi pham Gya mtsho and Kun bzang dPal Idan, (1997), p. 256: slarrje nyid kyi gzigs gnang mzad pa'i zhal
byang ni/nges shes rin po che'i sgron me 'di rang lo shin tu gzhon zhing slob gnyer gsar bu ba'i dus zhig na 'phral
du yid la shar rtsom stan geig par bris pa yin mod / don la 'gal ba med cing go rgyu gnad can dug pas ma bcos par
de gar byhag pa yin no // zhes mi pham pas rang lo nga bdun par smras pa dge'oll
33. John W. Pettit, (1998), pp. 43-44.
34. Gene E. Smith, (1969), pp. 5-10; Steven D. Goodman. (1981), pp. 59-67.
35. See MGS, vol. Ka, pp. 71-138: 'Ju Mi pham Gya mtsho, (1993): Bzo gnas nyer mkho'i za ma tog. Xining: Qinghai
People's Publishing House.
36. The four medicinal tantras are: rТsa rgyud or the Root Tantra, bShad rgyud or the Explanatory Tantra, Man ngag gi
rgyud or the Instructional Tantra and Phyi ma'i rgyud or the Later Tantra. They are basic works of Tibetan
indigenous medicine.
37. MGS, vol. Ka, pp. 559-75.
38. MGS, vol. Ka, pp. 751-815.
39. "Jam mgon 'Ju Mi pham Gya mtsho, (1979): Kad gnyis shan sbyar rab gsal nor bu'i me long, Leh: Smanrtsis
Shesrig Spendzod. Originally published in Kah thog monastery in Tibet.
40. MGS, vol. Kha, pp. 467-532.
41. These are not in the Zhechen redaction although Kun bzang dPal dan mentions in his catalogue.
42. MGS, vol. Hūm, pp. 463-72
43. MGS, vol. Kha, pp. 533-49.
44. MGS, vol. Ca, pp. 929-40; This has been reproduced in a book. See Mipham Nam rgyal Gya mtsho and Ka'blon
bShad sgra. (1998): Yig bskur ram gzhag me tog phreng ba, Chengdu: Sichuan People's Publishing House.
45. MGS, vol. Shri, pp. 185-640.
46. MGS, vol. Nga, pp. 591-616, vol. Tsa, pp. 217-61.
47. This cannot be found in the Zhechen redaction.
48. MGS, vol. E and Wam
49. Sang is the offering of incense by burning fragrant substances like sandalwood and juniper leaves. Sur is the
offering of smell by burning edible things like flour, butter, meat etc. These are both said to be Bon po rituals later
incorporated into Buddhist practices through coupling them with Buddhist principles. See MGS, vol. Dhi, pp. 1-88,
Pp. 407-15.
50. MGS, vol. Tsa, pp. 349-98. See translation by Jay Goldberg and Doya Nardin, Mo: Tibetan Divination System.
Ithaca: Snow Lion Publications, 1990.
51. This cannot be found in the Zhechen redaction.
52. MGS, Vol. Dhi, pp. 89-455.
53. MGS, vol. Dhi, pp. 771-1118.
54. MGS, vol. Ja.
55. MGS, vol. Nga, pp. 525-90.
56. A mdo dGe 'dun Chos 'phel. (1996): 'Dod pa'i bstan bcos, Dharamsala: Sherig Parkhang, p. 98.
57. MGS, vol. Nga, pp. 695-739.
58. MGS, vol. Ca, pp. 475-88.
59. See Mi pham Nam rgyal Gya mtsho.(1999): Las sna tshogs kyi be'u bum, Xining: Qinghai People's Publishing House.
60. MGS, vol. Cha, pp. 1-7.
61. Ibid., pp. 9-1010.
62. MGS, vol. Ca, pp. 489-925; MGS, vol. 25, pp. 191-482.
63. MGS, vol. 23, pp. 241-475.
64. MGS, vol. Om, pp. 1-157.
65. MGS, vol. 20.
66. MGS, vol. Hüm, pp. 473-620.
67. MGS, vol. Kha, 549-751.
68. MGS, vol. 27, pp. 285-354.
69. Ibid., pp. 467-94; MGS, vol. 23, pp. 319-28; MGS, Vol. Pa, pp. 787-820. The Five Swords are:
1) Don mam nges shes rab ral gri
2) brda shan 'byed the tshom drwa ba gcod pa'i ral gri



'Ju Mi pham Nam rgyal Gya mtsho
207
3) bDud kyi sgyu thabs joms pa mkhyen pa'i ral gri
104) Kun rtog 'ching ba gcod pa sngags kyi ral gri
5) Bya rtsol kun tu gcod pa ye shes ral gri
The five Lilies are:
1) mChog grub pa'i at pal
2) sNgags grub pa'i at pa!
3) Ye shes grub pa'i ut pal
4) Ten 'brel grub pa'i ut pal
5) bDud rtsi grub pa'i ut pal.
70. Mathew Kapstein, (1988): "Mipham's Theory of Interpretation", in Donald S. Lopez Jr. (ed.): Buddhist
Hermeneutics, University of Hawaii Press, pp. 149-74.
71. See the website: http://users.plinet.com/-rime/index.html
72. MGS, vol. Hum, pp. l-129.
73. MGS, vol. Om, pp. 159-201.
74. MGS, vol. Hūm, pp. 131-5.
75. MGS, vol. Ra.
76. MGS, vol. Ga, 410-509.
77. Ibid., pp. 517-670.
78. This cannot be found in the Zhechen redaction.
79. MGS, vol. Ga, pp. 343-58.
80. Ibid., pp. 332-42.
81. MGS, vol. 22, pp. 1-425.
82. Steven D. Goodman, (1981), pp. 58-78; Leslie S. Kawamura, (1981): "An Analysis of Mipham's m Khas 'jug", in
Ronald M. Davidson (ed.) Wind Horse: Proceedings of the North American Tibetological Society, Asian
Humanities Press, 112-26; Leslie S. Kawamura, (1982): "An Analysis of Yana-Kaufālya in Mipham's mKhas jug".
Bulletin of Institute of Buddhist Cultural Studies, Ryukoku University, vol. 20, 1-19; Leslie S. Kawamura, (1982):
"An Outline of Yāna-Kanālya in Mipham's mKhas jug", Indogakku Bukkyogaku Ronshu, vol. 29.1, 956-61; Leslie
S. Kawamura, (1983): "The Aksayamatinirdeśasātra and Mipham's mKhas 'jug", Contributions on Tibetan and
Buddhist Philosophy, Vienna: Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde, vol. 2, 131-145.
83. Mi pham rNam rgyal Gya mtsho, Erik Pema Kunzang (tr.) (1997): mKhas 'jug, Hong Kong: Rangjung Yeshe
Publications: Mi pham rNam rgyal Gya mtsho, Richard Barron (tr.) (1998): mKhas 'jug, Padma Publishing,
84. MGS, vol. Pa, pp. 1-347, and pp. 349-561.
85. MGS. vol. Ah.
86. MGS, vol. Pa, pp. 659-785.
87. Ibid., pp. 609-57. K. D. Mathes, I am told, has done a translation of this into German.
88. Ibid., pp. 563-608.
89. MGS, vol. Ga, pp. 359-78.
90. See footnote no. 70.
91. MGS, vol. Shri, pp. 1-70.
92. MGS, vol. 24, pp. 1-222.
93. This cannot be found in the Zhechen redaction.
94. MGS, vol. 24. pp. 223-352.
95. MGS, vol. Hüm, pp. 157-217.
96. Nāgārjuna and Lama Mipham, Leslie Kawamura (trans.) (1975): Golden Zephyr: Instructions from a Spiritual
Friend, California: Dharma Publishing.
97. MGS, vol. 21. pp. 439-500. See also English translation, Herbert V. Guenther, (1971): Buddhist Philosophy in
Theory and Practice, Baltimore: Penguin Books.
98. One of the Seven Great Treasures by Klong chen pa.
99. MGS, vol. Hüm, 137-55.
100. MGS, vol. E and Wam.
101. MGS, vol. 25, pp. 1-190.
102. MGS, vol. Shrī, p. 92; 'Ju Mi pham and Kunzang dPal Idan, (1997), pp. 22-3; MGS, vol. 19, p. 10.
103. MGS, vol. Hūm, pp. 253-434.
104. Kun bzang Chos grags. (1987), vol. Hüm, p. 635; Dudjom Rinpoche, (1991), vol. ii, p. 872



208
Karma Phuntshot
105. g Ter mas are the teachings believed to be hidden by Padmasambhava and his disciples and later rediscovered by
the Treasure Discoverers. Although this is common among rNying ma pas, it is not totally unknown in other
traditions.
106. Ka' mas are the teachings transmitted uninterruptedly from teacher to disciple since the time of Early Translation
107. MGS, vol. 21. pp. 1-207.
108. MGS, vol. 19. pp. 1-275.
109. MGS, vol. 21, pp. 510-610.
110. MGS, vol. Nga, pp. 417-65.
111. MGS, vol. 21. pp. 209-437.
112. MGS, vol. Nga, pp. 465-96.
e
113. MGS, vol. Ga, pp. 759-95.
114. Although Kun bzang dPal Idan mentions this in the catalogue, it is not much known that Mipham wrote this.
115. MGS, vol. Shri, pp. 139-84.
116. MGS, vol. 19, pp. 277-370.
117. MGS, vol. Om, pp. 839-54.
118. MGS, vol. 27, pp. 1-284, see also MGS, vol. 19, pp. 371-710.
119. Mipham. (1984): Cintämani: Tibetan Manuscripts on Buddhist Meditation of the Great Perfection School,
Varanasi: Tarthang Tulku.
120. See n. 32.
121. John Pettit. (1998).
122. See John W. Pettit, (1999).
123. dBu ma rgyan gyi mnam bshad 'jam dbyang bla ma dgyes pa'i zhal lung (Exegesis on Madhyamakälankära: The
Words of Delighted Master Mañjughosa), MGS, vol. Nga, pp. 1-358.
124. See also. Kennard Lipman, (1981): "A Controversial Topic from Mipham's Analysis of Santaraksita's
Madhyamakālankāra", in Ronald M. Davidson (ed.), Wind Horse: Proceedings of the North American
Tibetological Society, Asian Humanities Press, 40-57.
125. Ibid., pp. 359-415.
126. MGS, vol. Ca. pp 1-193: Mi pham Nam rgyal Gya mtsho, (1993), pp. 1-130.
127. E. Gene Smith, (1969), p. 8.
128. MGS, vol. Ca, pp. 191-474: Mi pham Nam rgyal Gya mtsho, (1993), pp. 133-464.
129. Ibid., pp. 1-193; Mi pham Nam rgyal Gya mtsho, (1993), pp. 467-679.
130, Paul Williams, (1998): The Reflexive Nature of Awareness: A Tibetan Madhyamaka Defence, Surrey: Curzon
Press.
131. Franz-Karl Ehrhard, (1988): "Observations on Prasangika Madhyamaka in the rNying-ma-pa-school" in Helga
Uebach and Jampa Panglung (eds.), Tibetan Studies: Proceedings of the 4 Seminar of the International
Association for Tibetan Studies, Munich: Schloss Hohenkammer, pp. 47-57.
132. Jug'grel zla ba'i zhal lung dri med shel phreng (Commentary on Madhyamakavatāra: Words of Candrakirti, the
Garland of Pure Crystal), MGS, vol. Om. pp. 497-837. dBu ma rtsa ba'i mchan gnas lugs rab gsal klu dbang
dgongs rgyan (Annotations of Mulamadhyamaka: The Illuminator of Reality and Ornament of Nägārjuna's
Thoughts), vol. Om, pp. 203-495.
133. Nga rabs pa here refers to the scholars prior to Tsong kha pa.
134. The Three Principal Practices are the Mind of Renunciation, Bodhicitta and Wisdom. Mipham's commentary is
however not within the Zhechen redaction.
135. MGS, vol. Pa, pp. 821-67.
136. MGS, vol. Shri. pp. 125-38.
137. See n. 86.
138. See n. 87
139. MGS, vol. 24, pp. 353-774.
140. MGS, vol. Ga, pp. 277-96.
141. Ibid., pp. 322-23.
142. Kun bzang dPal Idan mentions this in his catalogue but this is not even known to exist.
143. MGS, vol. Ga, pp. 297-323.
144. Katsumi Mimaki, (1982): "Le commentaire de Mipham sur le Jñānasārasamuccaya", Indological and Buddhist
Studies, Volume in Honour of Professor J.W. De Jong on his Sixtieth Birthday, pp. 353-76.



Ju Mi pham Nam rgyal Gya mtsho
209
145. Mi pham Nam rgyal Gya mtsho, Tarthang Tulku (tr. and comm.), (1997): Calm and Clear, California: Dharma
Publishing.
146. MGS, vol. 22. pp. 427-710.
147. Primordial Purity (Ka dag) is the term for the empty nature of all things in Dzogs chen philosophy.
148. MGS, vol. Shri. p. 88; Mi pham rNam rgyal Gya mtsho and Kun bzang dPal Idan, (1997). 19: Ka dag bdar sha
chod pa la //thal 'gyur Ita ba mthar phyin dgosll
149. MGS, vol. Om, p. 813: sNang stong mnyam par nges shes rdzogs pa che // klu sgrub gzhung lugs bzang po kho
nas mthong //



RECOVERING IDENTITY:
STUDENTS' FIELDWORK IN BHUTAN*
Francoise Pommarett
(CNRS, Paris)
Through the prism of a project to which I contribute in Bhutan, I would like to reflect in this note upon some
of the changes that I observed in this country after twenty-two years of constant interaction, especially in the
field of Himalayan culture. But this reflection will also touch on questions, brought out in an unexpected
manner through a field experience in 2000, linked to this project, of identity and modernity among the
college youth of Bhutan, considered to be the elite of the country, as well as the culture shock they
experienced when working in a village for the first time.
Himalayan and Bhutanese studies are quite a new concept in the Bhutanese education curriculum. They
are still on the fringes of mainstream studies but are rapidly gaining ground and the establishment of the new
Institute for Language and Cultural Studies (ILCS) devoted to Bhutanese studies is built south of Trongsa.
This Institute, which exists now near Thimphu, as well as Sherubtse College, are now part of the Royal
Bhutan University, a federation of higher education institutes all over the country, established in 2003.
The first important move showing an interest in the field of Himalayan studies took place in 1995 when
the Education Department accepted that Sherubtse (Shes rab rtse) College, the only university-level college
in the country at that time, signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the French National Centre for
Scientific Research (CNRS) and the University of Provence to have a programme of resource personnel and
training cooperation in this field. Efforts were made to encourage young Bhutanese to undertake research
into their own culture, participate in international seminars on Himalayan and Tibetan studies, and
publish articles.
These efforts were accompanied by several workshops at Sherubtse College, conducted by French
academics. The audience included not only history students - anthropology not yet being a subject in its own
right - but any student or lecturer interested in the topics. They ranged from research methodology and
fieldwork techniques to the history of Himalayan and Tibetan studies, introduction to ethnography and
anthropology, history of relations between Tibet and Bhutan, history of religions, and oral traditions. These
seminars were meant to create awareness amongst lecturers and students alike, and to sensitize them to the
imperious necessity of collecting data on, and customs of, their own country.
The field trip
In October 2000, I went to Sherubtse College with Samten Karmay, my colleague from the CNRS. The topic
of the workshop had been chosen by Tandin Dorji, our counterpart at Sherubtse College, who felt that the
students really needed to take on work in the field. This was a logical development after three successive
years of theoretical workshops and the fact that more and more Sherubtse College students were now asked
by government offices or NGOs to conduct field surveys. It was decided that any interested student
regardless of his or her major subject (history is only a subsidiary course at Sherubtse College), could take
this introduction to fieldwork.7
This first-time experimentation in field ethnography took place from the 16th to the 20th of October
2000 in Eastern Bhutan where Sherubtse College is located. The first day was devoted to a seminar in which
the students were reminded of the basis of ethnography in the field and the collection of data. The 17th, 18th
and 19th of October were spent in the field and on the 20th, back at Sherubtse College, the six groups of
students presented their findings to other students of College, their lecturers and officials.
To everyone's surprise, the field trip proved to be very popular with the students. Thirty-three persons
participated: thirty students, the lecturer-organizer and the two resource lecturers from France. There were
twenty-four boys and six girls aged between twenty and twenty-four years. Nine boys were from the 2nd



Recovering Identity: Students' fieldwork in Bhutan
211
year of the Dzongkha course, eleven boys and six girls came from 2nd year Economics, and four boys from 2nd
year Geography
Their motives for coming on this trip were a genuine interest in Bhutanese ethnography, but also the
need for more experience in collecting and analyzing data for surveys.
The Bhutanese lecturer-organizer had chosen the Phongme (Phongs med) "block". It was a good
choice as far as distance from the College was concerned, (a three-hour bus or truck ride), but a challenging
one because of several factors: This block was inhabited by different peoples; it was situated at the interface
between agriculturalists and pastoralists and on a trade route. The students were therefore faced to a
relatively complicated socio-economic set-up of which they were totally unaware.
I should say a few words here about Sherubtse College. Under the direction of Father W. Mackey, S.J.,
who worked for the Education Department, it began as a high school and was transformed, in 1976, into a
junior college. Today it is the most prestigious institution in the country, teaching, to the graduate level:
English, Dzongkha, Geography, Maths-Physics, Economics and Computer Science. The entrance exam is
very difficult and the 550 or so students of the College are considered to be the elite of the nation and the
future decision-makers. Their basic needs are taken care of by the government and they even receive a small
monthly stipend. The College campus is not significantly different from college campuses elsewhere, being
attractive and functional, with good facilities, and is located an hour's drive from the district capital
Trashigang (bKra shis sgang). The College students live what, by all accounts, is considered to be a
privileged and sheltered life. They have access to computers, e-mail and the Internet, and the library
subscribes to all the major Western and Asian magazines.
These remarks are important in this context because, although the students' parents came from all walks
of life and the students had been accepted into the college on the basis of academic merit, a certain number
of them had been largely cut off from their rural background for several years.
Early in the morning of the 17th October, the students left for Phongme in a bus with the Bhutanese
lecturer. Three hours later they reached the heart of the settlements situated at an altitude of 1,700 m. In
Eastern Bhutan - where, traditionally, clusters of houses forming what would be called a village are spread
all over the mountainside - the centre of a block is a village that includes the temple, primary school, post
office, Basic Health Unit (BHU), agriculture extension office and shops.
The "base camp" was the large primary school (three hundred students) whose headmaster had been
informed well in advance by the Education Department of this sudden assault on his otherwise quiet place.
Also informed was the "block headman", the gup (Dz. rgad po). Without his help, it would have been
impossible to work in the village. He never interfered in the work as he was busy settling local problems and
zooming up and down the main road on his scooter, but he had to be informed prior to our arrival as a matter
of courtesy
In such a short time, it was out of the question to do a thorough study of Phongme block. This workshop
was aimed at giving the students the basic tools for field research and creating among them more awareness
of the topic. We just wanted to assist them in this new experience and help them sort out their problems by
encouraging them to speak out and articulate their findings and doubts. It was decided not to tell them too
much about the problems they would encounter, but rather to let them go through the experience. This is the
sound Socratic method where the teacher is seen as an advisor and a guide rather than an intimidating figure.
The students were divided into six groups, each of which included a woman and a speaker of Tshangla
- a language commonly known as Sharchopkha (Dz. shar phyogs kha). This Eastern Bhutanese language is
very different from Dzongkha and in Eastern Bhutan only members of the young generation who have been
to school can speak Dzongkha. Most of the villagers over thirty-five years of age spoke only Tshangla, hence
the absolute need to have in each group one student who spoke this language. Each group was given one of
the following topics:
• The Phongme block geography and population
• Kinship system
• Marriage customs



212
Françoise Pommaret
. Religious practitioners
Agriculture and Trade
• Relations with the neighbouring pastoralist region of Sakteng (Sag steng)
Every morning after breakfast the three supervisors met the students for half an hour to guide them in their
day's work. Then each group went into the field for five hours. Some went to consult the village archives
and officials of the village, some went to settlements to interview villagers. These activities involved a lot
of walking, taking initiatives and adapting to unknown circumstances, all of which were quite a novelty for
students who were used to classes and regulated campus life. Some of them coped very well, while some
could not adjust to this new lifestyle and took refuge in passivity or even fell sick.
After lunch, we all met again at 3p.m. and each group had to explain its problems, doubts or findings.
This meeting lasted an hour and a half. In the evening, some played cards, some wrote notes or went back
for more interviews after talking with the supervisors.
On the evening of the 17th, there was a big school fête organized by the primary school, and in the early
afternoon of the 19th, before we went back to Sherubtse College, we watched the election of the new
Assembly member of the area. I will retum later to these two events.
The morning of the 20th, each group prepared for its presentation which took place that afternoon and
lasted three hours in the presence of students, lecturers and college officials. After each group had presented
its work, questions were asked from the floor. It was a very interactive event because by this time, the
students had shed their shyness and felt empowered by this experience which gave them confidence.
Who is what? Culture shock, cultural gap
The arrival of thirty college students and three lecturers ("lopen" / slob dpon) including a foreign woman
who spoke Dzongkha, as well as a man who looked like a Bhutanese but could speak neither Dzongkha nor
Tshangla, initially caused quite a stir in the small settlement at the side of the road. People came out of the
shops when the bus arrived and the headmaster rushed from his school to welcome us. The reaction of the
College students was very interesting. Most of them came down from the bus with their backpacks and
looked at the villagers who were looking at them. A few stayed in the bus until all the arrangements were
made because, they told me later, they were tired by their journey and found the place too hot and dusty.
They did not appear to show any curiosity or even faint interest in the surroundings or the arrangements. In
fact, when they finally came down from the bus, they were mostly girls and I therefore put this
attitude down to shyness, real or assumed, which is the proper behaviour for young Bhutanese women in
unknown surroundings.
Some of them wore silk jackets and fashionable platform shoes, which were totally inappropriate for
walking and for climbing the steep ladder-like staircases. Indeed I had made a mistake, taking for granted
that they would know what to wear in the village, and not taking into account the importance of the sense
of status of the Sherubtse students who showed it by dressing up.
Another problem was the village's single water tap. Water taps have brought a great improvement in
hygiene to Bhutanese villages but, as this one was installed in the middle of the settlement along the trail,
it, of course, did not provide any privacy and this was really difficult for the young students to bear.
None of them had brought a torch (flashlight), taking for granted that there would be electricity, which
the village still did not have in 2000. One consequence was that as soon as it was dark, even with a borrowed
flashlight, the young women were afraid to go to the toilet out in the fields and would go only if
accompanied. They also kindly offered to come with me. This attitude had partly to do with the ancient
beliefs in harmful spirits and partly to do with unwelcome encounters.
Food also proved to be an issue. The College had provided rations so that our group did not become a
burden on the village and primary school and we had funds to pay for firewood, vegetables, eggs and other
basic commodities. The primary school's cook was asked to cook for the whole group and paid a daily
stipend. After the first meal, which was basic Bhutanese school-meal with lots of rice and hot chilli peppers,
a vegetable curry and lentils, many students decided that the food was not tasty enough, and that they would



Recovering Identity: Students' fieldwork in Bhutan
213
take turns cooking in their own way. This, indeed, they did, scurrying to the village for cheese to buy and
peeling vegetables with unprecedented enthusiasm
This came as a surprise because most Bhutanese from the countryside are more than happy to get a free
meal, and as long as there is plenty of rice and chillies, they do not complain. These young educated students
had become choosy, a fact which was confirmed later by the College officials, who said that many students
did not eat the simple free meals provided in the College mess, but instead spent money to buy food, and
especially instant noodles, from the shops. A generation ago only a very few people could afford to be
choosy, and even then would not dare to be so because of the proper code of conduct.
The sun and walking were contingent problems. Because of their shoes, some of the girls could not
really walk on the steep slopes to get to the houses and walking for one hour in the sun amounted, in their
mind, to mild torture. It seems that they were so removed from their rural background by their lifestyle that
they had forgotten and did not feel much connection with women working in the fields under the hot sun for
hours on end.
These quite unimportant practical details serve, in themselves, as an assessment of the estrangement
from the village life and mentality that had taken place in the students in one generation. The lifestyles of
the villagers and the students had grown apart to such an extent that the students had, at first, none of their
usual cultural markers when they arrived in the village.
The election of the National Assembly people's representative, the "chimi" (Dz. spyi mi), was a telling
event. While one member of each family in Phongme block sat on the ground in front of the temple and
listened to official speeches before voting with the imprint of their fingers, the students told me that only
five of them had ever witnessed such a process before, and they had no idea of how it was done."
We asked the students to come and witness the event, telling them that it was part of the fieldwork to
observe any important event in the life of the village, even if it was not related directly to their topic. The
students said they felt awkward with all the villagers looking at them and hot because of the blistering sun,
both remarks being understandable. Indeed, in this very interesting turn of events, they were going through
the same feelings as a foreign anthropologist in a village, awkward and uncomfortable at first.
Throughout the fieldwork, this feeling came back as a leitmotif. In fact, the students, although
Bhutanese, experienced with the local population much the same problems as any anthropologist coming
from abroad would encounter, and this was compounded by the fact that the majority of them did not
understand the local language.
Everybody was confronted by an odd and complex situation where identities became blurred: the
students felt removed from their own countrymen at least as much as the foreign academics accompanying
them; in fact, they felt a kind of guilt feeling, because, being Bhutanese, they thought they would easily
understand their own people, which was not the case. In this context, the foreigners had indeed an advantage
over them: because of their identities as foreigners, they would be excused for cultural shortcomings, while
the young Bhutanese experienced a kind of unexpected culture shock in their own country,
This shock became clear after the first day of fieldwork. During the evening general meeting, the
students said that the villagers were diffident and they would not talk to them or answer their questions.
Moreover, the students were taken for a tax survey team, which did not help contacts!
The students explained that they had gone into the houses in a casual way, as is done in rural Bhutan,
and then started asking precise questions, questionnaire-like, to villagers who were not only puzzled by this
lack of manners, but also very reluctant to talk
The students therefore realized from this first day of fieldwork that their identity as Bhutanese as well
as Sherubtse College students did not give them much privilege because the villagers regarded them as
aliens. They had to revert to more traditional ways of dealing with people: The next morning, they rushed
to buy betel quids, "doma", from the little shop to take as gifts to the households they planned to visit.
We had deliberately not given any precise instruction to the students as to how to go about dealing with
people because we felt they would resent this as preposterous and patronising coming from foreigners. We



214
Françoise Pommaret
had decided to let them go through the experiences and then listen to their reactions. The Bhutanese
súpervisor totally agreed with this view.
Other causes of surprise for the students were the language problem, the complexity of the village ethnic
set-up and the latent ostracism against one group. Being used to living on the College campus in a mixed
social and ethnic environment, the students were appalled to find that one ethnic group in the Phongme block,
who had settled there three generations earlier from the Eastern highlands, was living separately from the
main Easterners group, that inter-marriage was frowned upon by both communities and that when the
students went to visit the "outsiders", they pretended to speak only their own language, not even Sharchopkha
(Tshangla), therefore cutting themselves off from any form of communication. The reasons for this behaviour
are too complex to be explained here, but the students came back, shaking their heads in disbelief.
Moreover, as many students did not speak Sharchopkha fluently, they had to rely on the person in the
group who spoke it in order to communicate, and this person eventually became the leader of the group
while the other members of the group discovered - on top of the problem of straight questions, already
mentioned earlier - the translation gap, as well as the need to cross-check information either with other
people, or with the written records
The first evening's meeting was full of doubts, questions and disbelief, accompanied by Madam, they
refuse to answer. Madam, we do not understand them." These students had, discovered the basic problems
of fieldwork and realized that, while not foreigners, they were aliens to the villagers and vice-versa.
After a prolonged session, a few of them were very discouraged and their interest in the fieldwork
vanished, but most of them felt that their honour as students from Sherubtse College was at stake. Because
of the academic system they were used to, they had thought that a straight question calls for a straight
answer. Instead they found out that the villagers' mentality and logic were far from ticking answers on an
exam paper and replying to the point.
Therefore, the next morning, they went back to their respective assignments with a more open mind to
the villagers' ways and customs, taking little gifts of betel quids, sweets and biscuits.
. They also decided not to be so blunt in their quest for information. Their efforts to adapt were genuine
and the breakthrough with the villagers came the second evening when the primary school organized a fête
in honour of the students and for the villagers.
As soon as this information arrived on the second morning, the students decided that they must
contribute to the fête by putting up a show for the school and the villagers. All of them had talents of some
sort, as extra-curricular activities are very much encouraged in the education system. The primary school
brought out its sound system powered by a precious generator, a big dinner was prepared by the school and
was served on the sports ground. Lamas and officials were invited to attend and the villagers came to watch
the show. The first event of the evening was a bon fire lit in a traditional style by torch-bearers coming from
the four cardinal directions and saying some auspicious words in English'2. The show was a succession of
dances, songs and sketches by the school children and the College students. There were English songs
performed by the singing stars of Sherubtse College, popular modern Dzongkha and Sharchopkha songs,
dances from Northern Bhutan, Southern Bhutan and Hindi films performed by the school children, and
Sharchopkha and Dzongkha comic sketches by a student who was a true comedian. Each number was
introduced in a professional style by the students and part of the show was presented with poise and zest by
a young woman who wanted to become an anchorwoman on Bhutanese television. The audience roared with
laughter and clapped enthusiastically.
The best speakers from the College also explained to the audience where they came from, that they had
gained admission to Sherubtse College through hard work and that the Phongme children could have the
same opportunity. They described the college in enthusiastic terms, telling the villagers that they were aware
of having been given a great opportunity and having to give back to the country what had been given to them
by serving the people. Although for a casual outsider, it might have sounded a little rhetoric, the enthusiasm
of the students and their spontaneous words did not leave any doubt about their conviction, and this included
the Southern Bhutanese students who spoke excellent Dzongkha, in addition to Nepali and English. 3



Recovering Identity: Students' fieldwork in Bhutan
215
Their words were the echo of the King's address to all Bhutanese students: "As the future of Bhutan
lies in the hands of our people, it is our responsibility to make sure that the future well-being of our country
is secure in the hands of Bhutanese people and that our younger generations can successfully shoulder this
sacred responsibility with complete loyalty and dedication".!4
The evening ended with a "lebe" (Dz. legs sbe) dance, the auspicious send-off dance in which everyone
must participate, regardless of rank and status. It is performed at all occasions and is seen as a "community
binding" ritual.
That evening, the students came down from the lofty level where the villagers had placed them and
became part of the community. The fact that the students had produced a show for the villagers and talked
to them about their life, as well as shown respect for the lamas and the officials, had restored the traditional
order where to be in a harmonious relationship, one has to give and take at the same time to be respected.
According to the Bhutanese scholar Karma Ura, "Harmony is a matter of individuals not upsetting the
choreography dependent on group combination. Humility, a key Buddhist attribute, is directly concerned
with group orientation and social harmony. Harmony is facilitated if individuals can subordinate themselves
to the group, while the group can reconcile and balance its interests with those of its individual members".!
In this context, the concept of exchange, so dear to many anthropologists, was relevant. The students
were no longer seen as disturbing the normal life with their questions, they were not predators' but givers,
and therefore could find their place in the society.
However, also implemented there was a deep Bhutanese concept rooted in Buddhism, Thadamtshil
(Dz. mTha' dam Ishig or Tha dam tshig!? / Tib. dam tshig). It is respect for elders but also recognition of
those to whom you owe respect and responsibility towards younger or less privileged ones.
The Bhutanese society operates largely on what is considered a moral concepts and people who are
seen not to be abiding by it in their behaviour towards others are often rejected. They no longer belong to
the society, and, therefore, members of the society have no duties or obligations towards them. Karma Ura
analyzes this concept in its Buddhist context: "Buddhist ethics have always been a strong feature of the
Bhutanese society. Custom and law supported the moral code inspired by religion. Buddhist morality
became influential socially and legally partly because it percolated down to the villages. Of these values, the
principle of tha damtshig le jude has gained currency and finds mention in school textbooks. The boundary
(tha) of morality (damtshig) and causes and effects of actions (le jude) are reasserted in this concept, which
should limit our actions to what accords with morality. This kind of ethical constraint is meant to bind all of
us, and the freedom we should enjoy is to live in a way becoming to Buddhists [...]. The idea of concern
for others or altruism can be seen as a broadened welfare function, which does not include people, but also
other beings that constitute the environment."
This second evening at the school signalled a shift in the attitude of both the villagers and the students.
However, I could not immediately grasp which operating concept had made this change possible. The next
morning, it was easier to explain to the students the importance of participant observation" in ethnography
because they had just experienced it, but I still felt it was quite inappropriate to describe what I had
witnessed: a key element of explanation was still missing.
It was only later that afternoon during the choekhor (chos skor) that the moral concept of Thadamtshi
became clear to me. It was this "root-element"20 of moral conduct in Bhutanese society that had been at work
during this field experience.
The choekhor is an annual religious festival that takes place in Phongme on the 21st day of the 8th
month. After a ritual performed by the religious practitioners inside the temple, the villagers, including
women, carry the Buddhist scriptures around the fields of the village as a blessing. The students asked
Lopen Yonten Phuntsho questions about the significance of this ritual that some of them had never seen.
Lopen Yonten Phuntsho was a learned religious practitioner, who happened to be the father of one of our
students and a much respected lama in the area.
During the visit to the temple, the students' behaviour conformed in all respects to the proper etiquette
code, Driglam Namzhag" (Dz. Grig lam rnam gzhag?). Gone was the casual attitude and English slang,



216
Françoise Pommarett
o
Impeccably dressed, true believers or not, they all paid respect to the religious practitioners and the images
on the altar, lit incense, offered Daldas for the butter-lamps and were blessed by holy scented water.
Once outside the temple, with great deference, they asked Lopen Yonten Phuntsho the meaning of the
Choekhor ritual. He replied at length. Once again, everybody behaved in a manner appropriate to the
situation and did not interrupt the lama, the girls maintaining a slightly greater distance from the lama than
did the boys.
At last, I found myself to be, unwittingly, part of the system. I learned that when the students came back
to Sherubtse College, they told their friends that I had behaved appropriately in the Bhutanese way" ('Brug
gi lugs gsol) by taking care of their comfort, ministering to two of them who had fallen sick, and cleaning
the wound of a girl who had fallen from a steep staircase. Because I was their supervisor and a foreigner, I
was not expected to look after them and had been automatically placed in a different social and moral set-
up. By taking care of them, I had unconsciously integrated what they considered as the Bhutanese value
system and acted according to Thadamtshi.
Conclusion
The transformation of English-speaking, happy-go-lucky kids with Walkmans in their ears into etiquette-
abiding, religious-minded and socially responsible youngsters was natural in the sense that it was not forced
upon them by anybody giving orders - they spontaneously adopted the correct behaviour on important
occasions. This transformation was probably due to the concept of Thadamtshi, which is not obvious to
grasp.26 As for Driglam Namzhag, the code of conduct, etiquette, it could be understood as the implementing
arm, the external manifestation of Thadamtsi. In other words, the code of conduct would be the agent that
implements the Thadamtsi concept.
This hypothesis appears to be supplemented by Lyonpo (blon po) Dago Tshering in his introduction to
the Bhutanese etiquette: a manual: "The etymology of 'Driglam Namzhag' is as follows: Drig -
harmonious; lam - path or behaviour; nam - in order; zhag - to keep. Therefore, the expression 'Driglam
Namzhag' means to maintain harmonious behaviour. It is a set of social norms aimed at fostering in a person
the proper mode of conduct and social values.*27
Without any fear of sounding naive, it was on all accounts and for all of us a remarkable and enriching
experience. Besides having been an introduction to fieldwork, it turned out to be, for students accustomed
to foreign thoughts and styles, an exercise in identity searching and in revitalizing their Bhutanese cultural
markers.
Having arrived as aliens, the students left the village as insiders - even if not on the same deep level as
the villagers. They had reverted to the traditional modus operandi in accordance to the Thadamtshi concept
and its agent, the code of behaviour (Driglam Namzhag), thus allowing themselves to be reintegrated into
the same value system as that of the villagers.
Notes
This paper was written at the beginning of 2001 and therefore reflects the situation at that time. Since then the issue
of Thadamtsi (mTha' dam Ishig) and Driglam Namzha (sGrig lam rnam gzhag) has been discussed by Richard
Whitecross ("Virtuous beings: driglam namzhag and thadamtshi and being a moral person in contemporary
Bhutanese society", paper presented at Edinburgh University, Dept of Anthropology, Jan. 2001, unpublished;
"Thadamtshi: the moral basis of Bhutanese social values". Bhutan Society. December 2002; "Driglam Namzha: the
code of conduct and its role in contemporary Bhutan". Paper presented at Tibetan Identity: Continuity and Change
(1950 - 2000) Conference, School of Oriental and African Studies, 124 September 2001); and Karma Phuntsho
("Echoes of Ancient Ethos: Reflections on Some Popular Bhutanese Social Themes", in K. Ura and S. Kinga (eds.)
The Spider and the Pigler. Proceedings of the First International Seminar on Bhutan Studies, The Centre for Bhutan
Studies: Thimphu, 2004, 564-580).
1. I would like to thank here Gene E. Smith. Without his help and support, I would never have gone to Bhutan and
embarked on what is the most enriching professional and personal experience in my life. This article is just a small
token of the enormous gratitude I owe him.



Recovering Identity: Students' fieldwork in Bhutan
217
2. This institute replaced the Rigney (rig gnas) school established in 1961, which was transformed into the Institute
of Language and Cultural Studies in 1996 and presently located at Semtokha (srin mo ndo khal sems rtogs kha) near
Thimphu. UNESCO worked with the Education Division of Bhutan on a master-plan for this institute which will
be shifted at a new location, Takse south of Trongsa, in the near future. A new curriculum is being drafted.
3. The Centre for Bhutan Studies (CBS) established in 1998 in Thimphu works as a think tank and is not an institution
which offers higher education courses, www.bhutanstudies.org.bt
4. In this article, names and nouns will be written as they are today in English transcription in Bhutan. At the first
occurrence of the name or noun, the Dzongkha transliteration will be given in brackets. Dzongkha is the national
language of Bhutan
5. Tandin Dorji is now officer at the Curriculum Division, Ministry of Education in Paro. He holds a MA in
Anthropology from the University of Provence and is currently working on his PhD (University of Paris X).
6. All my sincere thanks go to Tandin Dorji who masterminded the logistics of this workshop, and to his colleague
Ugyen Pelgen, who, although unfortunately, he could not join us in the field, was involved in the preparation.
7. Funds for the logistics were provided by the French Foreign Ministry in the framework of the cooperation project.
8. The detailed fieldwork results were published. See Tandin Dorji, "Field trip to Phongmey: a synoptic report", in
Sherub Doenme, Academic journal of Sherubtse college, Kanglung, vol. 6 (1&2) 2002, 86-102.
9. A block, "gewog". (Dz. rged 'og) is the smallest administrative unit, consisting of several settlements,
10. On Father Mackey's education work in Bhutan, see his biography by Howard Solverson, The Jesuit and the
Dragon, Montreal: Robert Davies Publishing, 1995.
11. The outcome of the election was that the incumbent "chimi" was seen as inefficient on the issue of electricity, and
was replaced by a woman "chimi".
12. English is the medium of instruction from the primary school level, along with Dzongkha.
13. I will not deal in this article with what has been termed the "Southern problem" - which erupted in the early 1990s
- and its consequences.
14. Bhutan 2020: a vision for peace, prosperity and happiness, Thimphu: Planning Commission, 1999, 13.
15. Karma Ura, "Tradition and development", in Bhutan: mountain-fortress of the gods, C. Schicklgruber and E.
Pommaret (eds.), London-Boston: Serindia-Shambhala, 1997: 247.
16. See Karma Ura 1997: 239-249; and Richard Whitecross, "Virtuous beings: driglam namzhag and thadamtshi and
being a moral person in contemporary Bhutanese society". paper presented at Edinburgh University, Dept of
Anthropology, Jan. 2001.
17. Both spellings are found in Dzongkha. The second appears more in line with the meaning.
18. mTha' dam tshig / Tha dam Ishig is often associated with las rgyu 'bras, which means the fruit of one's actions in
a Buddhist context.
19. K. Ura, 1997: 247-248.
20. I use here the neologism "root-element" in reference to the words "root-teacher" and "root-teaching" in the
Buddhist concept.
21. I will not, on this occasion, go into the detailed description of religious practitioners in Bhutan.
22. On this ritual in Bhutan, see F. Pommaret, "Yul and Yul tha: the territory and its deity in Bhutan", in the Bulletin of
Tibetology, Gangtok, 2004.
23. On the Bhutanese code of conduct, see: Driglam Namzhag (Bhutanese etiquette: a manual), Grig lam rnam gzhag
lag len. National Library, Thimphu: National Library 1999 (bilingual); and Grigs lam rnam gzhag gi deb ther nor
bu'i 'phreng ba, Gyal po'i gzim dpon rDo rje rgyal mtshan, Thimphu: National Library, 1999.
24. In Tibetan bzhag, but in Dzongkha gzhag.
25. Dalda is a kind of vegetable margarine manufactured in India and which replaces butter as offering in the
Himalayas. Butter, which is much more expensive, is reserved for grand occasions.
26. On Thadamtshi, see sGrigs lam rnam gzhag gi deb ther nor bu'i 'phreng ba, 1999: 32-39
27. Bhutanese etiquette: a manual, 1999: xxxvii.



PHILOSOPHICAL SYSTEMS AND THE DEBATE OVER IDEAS
IN THE BONPO MOTHER TANTRA
John Myrdhin Reynolds
Part One: General Introduction to Bon
A. Bon and Buddhism in Tibet
Bon is the name for the pre-Buddhist religious culture of Tibet, sometimes erroneously thought to represent
just a primitive North Asian shamanism. However, nowadays Tibetan Bonpos are not shamans, but have
monks, scholars, books, and monasteries fully comparable with the four Buddhist schools. Moreover, Bon
has been recognized by the Dalai Lama and his government as the fifth Tibetan school and representation
on the Council of Religious Affairs at Dharamsala has been given to the Bonpos.
Like the Nyingmapa school, Bon divides its teachings into nine successive vehicles (theg pa rim dgu)
and its higher spiritual teachings into Sutra (mdo), Tantra (rgyud, sngags), and Dzogchen (man ngag,
sems phyogs). Thus, one may ask, if Bon possesses similar institutions and teachings to the Tibetan
Buddhist schools, what is the difference between them? Both sides agree it is principally a difference
of lineage.
B. Accusation of Plagiarism
The similarity of Bonpo and Buddhist texts and teachings is usually explained by the medieval Tibetan
histories composed by Buddhist monk-scholars as simple plagiarism. The Bonpos merely copied Buddhist
texts and changed just a few words, as example, changing chos into bon, and thereby appropriated the texts
as their own. This seemed a plausible explanation before the Bon texts themselves came to light for Western
scholars. However, in the past few decades many Bon texts were reprinted in India and now in China there
has been republished the Bonpo bka' 'gyur and bKa'brten, so the situation is now quite different than it was
years ago. And indeed, the historical situation with regard to Bon also appears to be much more complex
than simple plagiarism.
C. Three Phases in the Development of Bon
The Bonpos are aware of the efforts by Tibetan historians to denigrate their tradition as mere plagiarism. The
Bonpo Lamas reply that their tradition, which they assert comes from Tazik in Central Asia, is the older and
that, indeed, Indian Buddhism is based upon it! They point to extant lineages in seeking to establish this fact,
as, for example, the lineages found in the Zhang zhung snyan rgyud.' But they are also aware that in the
Buddhist histories and in some Western writings it is asserted that Bon is only primitive shamanism. Modern
Bonpo scholars, such as Lopon Tenzin Namdak, point out that the word Bon has three distinct meanings,
referring to three separate historical strata:
1. Primitive Bon
The indigenous shamanism and animistic tribal religious culture of Tibet and Zhangzhung, expressed in the
four Causal Ways of Bon (rgvu'i bon) and preserved in rituals both Bonpo and Buddhist.
1. On the Bonpo lineages for the Zhang chung snyan rgyud, see Samten G Karmay, The Little Luminous Boy: The
Oral Tradition from the Land of Zhangzhung depicted on two Tibetan Paintings, Orchid Press, Bangkok 1998. And
on the traditional Bonpo view of their history, see Shardza Rinpoche in Samten G. Karmay, The Treasury of Good
Sayings: A Tibetan History of Bon, London Oriental Series Vol. 26, Oxford University Press, London 1972



Philosophical Systems and the Debate Over Ideas
219
2. Old Bon (bon rnying ma) or g. Yung drung bon
The higher spiritual teachings of the Fruitional Ways of Bon ('hras bu'i bon) that comprise Sutra, Tantra,
and Dzogchen. These are said to have been translated from the Zhangzhung language into Tibetan
beginning, it is said, in the time of the second Tibetan king Mu khri btsan po and continuing up through the
early Medieval Period. These texts of Old Bon are classified as gter ma (hidden treasure texts) and as snyan
rgyud (oral tradition).
3. New Bon (bon gsar ma)
The Bonpo Terma tradition since the 14th century, mainly in Eastern Tibet, written not in the archaic
language of the above, but contemporary Buddhistic Tibetan. This textual tradition is closely related to the
Nyingmapa Terma system. Polymaths like the late Shardza Rinpoche (d. 1935) were exponents of both Old
and New Bon. However, Lopon Tenzin Namdak and the revived sMan ri monastery in India remain leading
proponents of the Old Bon, especially the Bru lugs, the traditions of the ancient Bru clan who originally
established this monastic lineage.?
D. The Tantra System of Bon
1. The Primordial Buddha and the Three Transmissions
According to Bonpo tradition, the teachings of both Tantra and Dzogchen originated from the Primordial
Buddha Kun tu bZang po, the Dharmakaya, who is their ultimate source. These revelations occurred on a
transcendent plane of existence called Akanistha (og min) at the summit and center of all existence and on
an occasion outside of profane time and history. There is no pretense of an historical circumstance here. Kun
tu bZang po, as the Primordial Buddha, has been enlightened from the very beginning and has never been
mixed up in Samsara nor tainted by its passions and obscurations. He remains ever beyond time and
conditioning and causality. Yet, He is simultaneously present as the principal of enlightenment or Buddha-
nature inherent in the core of every single sentient being. In this function as the Adibuddha or Primordial
Buddha, He corresponds to Samantabhadra (kun tu bzang po) in the Old Tantra system of the Nyingmapas.
According to Bon, and in particular to the Zhang zhung snyan rgyud, the initial line of transmission was
transcendental and supra-mundane, occurring under the light of eternity and at the center of existence. This
represented the direct mind-to-mind transmission of the Sugatas or Buddhas, usually listed as nine in
number, so-called because it is instantaneous and telepathic without symbols or words intervening,
Another subsequent transmission occurred by way of symbolic expression among the Vidyadharas or
"knowledge holders" belonging to different races divine (tha), chthonic (klu), and human (mi); and by way
of words among human masters. There are, therefore, three principal modes of transmission:
(A) The Mind Transmission of the Sugatas (bder gshegs dgongs brgyud),
(B) the Symbolic Transmission of the Vidyadharas (rig 'dzin brda brgyud), and
(C) the Oral Transmission of the Siddhas (grub thob snyan brgyud).
2. The Three Cycles of Precepts
The texts of the Bon tradition are classified in a number of ways. In general, the Buddha Tonpa Shenrab, the
founder of the Bon tradition, is said to have expounded Bon in three cycles of teachings which are Outer,
Inner, and Secret (bka' phyi nang gsang skor gsum)."
2. Again, on the Bru clan and its associated monasteries of Gyas ru dben sa kha and Bkra shes sman ri, see Karmay.
Treasury, op. cit.
3. The Three Cycles of Precepts which are Outer, Inner, and Secret (bka phyi nang gsang skor grum):
1. The Outer Cycle (phy skor) pertaining to the Sutra system (mdo lugs) which represents the Path of Renunciation
(spong lam):



220
John Myrdhin Reynolds
3. The Four Portals of Bon and the Treasury
But a more usual classification is known as the Four Portals of Bon and the Treasury which is the fifth (bon
sgo bzhi mdzod Inga). This mode of classification appears to represent an older and independent system of
classification in contrast to the better known Nine Ways. These Portals of Bon comprise four groups of
teachings together with a general appendix known as the Treasury (mdzod).
4. The Nine Ways of Bon
Then there is the classification system known as the Nine Ways of Bon or the Nine Successive Vehicles to
Enlightenment (bon theg pa rim dgu). This includes three distinct Terma (gter ma) traditions:
(A) The System of the Southern Treasures
The System of the Southern Treasures (tho gter lugs) refers to the treasure texts discovered at 'Brig mtshan
mtha' dkar in South Tibet and at sPa gro in Bhutan. This tradition is divided into the Causal Ways (rgyu'i
theg pa), which have worldly purposes, and the Fruitional Ways ("bras bu'i theg pa), which have a spiritual
purpose, the transcendent goal of liberation from Samsara.
2. The Inner Cycle (nang skor) pertaining to the Tantra system (sngags lugs) rep the Path of Transformation (sgyur
lam);
3. The Secret Cycle (gsang skor) pertaining to the Upadesha teachings (man ngag) representing the Path of [Self-)
Liberation (grol lam) or Dzogchen.
4. The Four Portals of Bon and the Treasury which is the fifth (bon sgo bzhi mdzod Inga):
1. The Bon of the White Waters" containing the Fierce Mantras (chab dkar drag po sngags kyi bon). This
represents the Tantra system (sngags lugs) and includes the cycle of the Father Tantras of the General
Collection" (pha rgyud spyi spungs skor).
2. The Bon of the Black Waters" for the continuity of Existence (chab nag srid pa rgyud kyi bon), this represents
the shamanic and magical rituals for expelling evil spirits and negative energies (black), corresponding to the
Causal Ways of Bon.
3. The Bon of the Extensive Collection from Phanyul ('phan yul rgyas pa 'bum gyi bon), this represents the Sutra
system (mdo lugs), especially including the Khams chen, the Prajnaparamita in 16 vols.
4. The Bon of the Scriptures and the Secret Instruction of the Masters (dpon gsas man ngag lung gi bon), consist
of the Agamas and Upadeshas for Dzogchen.
5. The Treasury (mdzod), the appendix with materials from all four portals
5. The Nine Ways of Bon or the Nine Successive Vehicles to Enlightenment (bon theg pa rim dgu) according to the
System of the Southern Treasures (tho gter lugs):
A. The Four Causal Ways of Bon (bon rgvu'i theg pa bzhi):
1. The Way of the Practice of Prediction (phywa gshen theg pa), principally concerned with divination (mo),
astrological calculation (rtsis), medical diagnosis (dpyad), and healing rituals (gto).
2. The Way of the Practice of Visible Manifestations (snang gshen theg pa), concerned with invoking the gods
and positive energies.
3. The Way of the Practice of Magical Power (phrul gshen theg pa), concerned with controlling the spirits and
exorcism rituals (sel ba) for dispelling negativities,
4. The Way of the Practice of Existence (srid gshen theg pa), concerned with the process of dying, the Bardo
experience, and the process of rebirth (srid pa), including 'Dur ritual for setting to rest ghosts.
B. The Five Fruitional Ways of Bon (bon 'bras bu'i theg pa lnga)
1. The Way of the Virtuous Lay Practitioners (dge bsnyen theg pa), concerned with ethics and morality, the 10
Paramitas, building stupas, etc.
2. The Way of the Ascetic Sages (drang srong theg pa), concerned with the Vinaya rules for monks.
3. The Way of the White A (a dkar theg pa), includes both the Lower and the Higher Tantras, deity
transformation, mandala practice, etc.
4. The Way of the Primordial Shen (ye gshen theg pa), concerned with proper relationship to the Guru, Guru
Sadhana, etc.
5. The Unsurpassed Way (bla med theg pa) or Dzogchen. See David Snellgrove, The Nine Ways of Bon: Excerpts
from the gZi briid edited and translated, London Oriental Series vol.18. Oxford University Press, London
1967; reprinted Prajna Press, Boulder 1980.



Philosophical Systems and the Debate Over Ideas
221
(B) The System of the Central Treasures
The System of the Central Treasures (dbus gter lugs) refers to the treasure texts discovered in Central Tibet,
including those at bSam yas monastery. This tradition employs a classification system similar to the
Nyingmapa one.
(C) The System of the Northern Treasures
Finally there is the Nine Ways according to the System of the Northern Treasures (hyang gter lugs).
According to our authorities, Lopon Tenzin Namdak and Shardza Rinpoche, little is known of this system.
5. The Four Types of Tantra
According to Lopon Tenzin Namdak," there are four distinct classes of Tantras in the Bon tradition:
(A) Kriya Tantra, "the Tantra of Ritual Action" (hva rgvud, bya ha'i rgyud)
Here there are found twelve ritual texts or Tantras (rgyud bcu gnyis) and as many Yidam practices
(B) Charya Tantra, the Tantra of Conduct" (spyod rgyud, spyod pa'i rgyud)
Here there are seven principal Tantras and Yidam practices. These two classes comprise the Outer or Lower
Tantras.
(C) Yeshen Tantra, "the Tantra of the Primordial Practice" (ye gshen gyi rgyud)
Here there are five principal Yidams belonging to the Father Tantras (pha rgyud) who represent the aspects
of Body, Speech, Mind, Quality, and Activity respectively. They are also known as "the Five Supreme
6. The Nine Ways according to the System of the Central Treasures (dbus gter lugs):
1. The Way of Gods and Men where one relies on another (lha mi gzhan rten gyi theg pa): This corresponds to the
Shravakayana of the Nyingmapa system and to the Vaibhashika philosophy (Hinayana).
2. The Way of the Shenrabpas who understand by themselves (rang rtogs gshen rab kyi theg pa): This corresponds
to the Pratyekabuddhayana and the Sautrantika philosophy (Hinayana).
3. The Way of the Compassionate Bodhisattvas (thugs rje sens dpa'i theg pa): This corresponds to the
Bodhisattvayana and the Chittamatra philosophy of Yogachara school (Mahayana).
4. The Way of the Bodhisattvas who are without Conceptual Elaborations (g.yung drung sems dpati spros med pa'i
theg pa): This also corresponds to the Bodhisattvayana and the Madhyamaka philosophy (Mahayana).
5. The Way of the Primordial Bon of Pure Conduct and Ritual Action (bya ba gisang spyod ye bon theg pa): This
corresponds to the Kriya Tantra.
6. The Way of the Clairvoyant Knowledge that possesses every aspect (mam par kun Idan mngon shes kyi theg pa):
This corresponds to Charya Tantra.
7. The Way of Visibly Manifesting Compassion by way of the Generation Process in terms of Siddhis (dngos
bskyed thugs rje rol pa'i theg pa): This corresponds to Yoga Tantra and to Mahayoga Tantra where the emphasis
is on the Generation Process (bskyed rim).
8. The Way wherein Everything is Completely Perfected and Exceedingly Meaningful (shin tu don Idan kun rdzogs
kyi theg pa): This corresponds to Mahayoga Tantra and Anuyoga Tantra where the emphasis is on the Perfection
Process (rdzogs rim).
9. The Unsurpassed Way of the Highest Peak of the Primordial Great Perfection (ye nas rdzogs chen yang rtse bla
med kyi theg pa): This represents Dzogchen.
See Lopon Tenzin Namdak and John Reynolds (tr.), The Condensed Meaning of an Explanation of the Teachings
of Yungdrung Bon, Bonpo Foundation, Kathmandu n.d.; also printed as an appendix in John Myrdhin Reynolds,
Yungdrung Bon: The Eternal Tradition, Bonpo Translation Project (privately printed), New York 1994.
7. Oral communication.
8. In the Kriya Tantra (bya ba'i rgyud), there are 12 ritual texts or Tantras (rgyud bou gnyis) and as many Yidams
practices: (1) Kun dbyings, (2) Byams Idan, (3) Dge bsnyen, (4) Sman lha, (5) Kun rig, (6) Rgval ba rgya misho,
(7) 'Dus 'khor. (8) Byams ma. (9) rRnam dag. (10) Rnam 'joms, (11) Smon lam, (12) Gde spyod.
9. In the Charya Tantra (spyod pa'i rgyud), there are seven principal Tantras and corresponding Yidams practices: (D
Klong rgyas, (2) Rnam dag padma klong yang, (3) rRnam par rgyal ba, (4) Gto bu pho shyong. (5) Rgyun. (6) Rgyas
par kun snang, (7) Ma tri rin chen sgron ma.



222
John Myrdhin Reynolds
Divine Citadels" (gsas mkhar mchog Inga). The first three Tantras are known as the General Collection (spyi
spungs). Then there are eight additional Tantras.
(D) Yeshen Chenpo Tantra, the Tantra of Total Primordial Practice" (ye gshen chen po'i rgyud)
The focus of practice is on the Perfection Process (rdzogs rim) and the emphasis is on Guru Sadhana
(bla sgrub) rather than on Yidam practice, as for example, Dran pa nam mkha', Tshe dbang rig 'dzin, and
so on.
Part Two: Introduction to the Mother Tantra
A. The Bonpo Mother Tantra and Its Contents
1. The Position of the Mother Tantra
In terms of the above systems of classification for the Bonpo Tantras, the Mother Tantra is classified as A
dkar theg pa according to the Southern Treasures, as Shin tu don dan kun rdzogs kyi theg pa according to
the Central Treasures, and as Ye gshen gyi rgyud according to the four-fold system of Tantras. Nevertheless,
the ultimate view of the Mother Tantra is considered to be Dzogchen, which is the highest of all vehicles."
2. The Tantras of the Base, the Path, and the Fruit
The Cycle of the Mother Tantra is known as "the Sun of Compassion" (ma rgyud thugs rje nyi ma'i skor).12
The root texts of the cycle comprise the three Buddha Tantras:
(A) The Tantra of the Base (gzhi yi rgyud) which is entitled The Tantra of the Primordial
Buddhahood of the Base (ma rgyud thugs rje nyi ma gzhi ye sangs rgyas pa'i rgyud),
(B) the Tantra of the Path (lam gyi rgyud) which is entitled The Tantra of the Manifest
Buddhahood of the Path (ma rgyud thugs rje nyi ma lam mngon sangs rgyas pa'i rgyud), and
(C) the Tantra of the Fruit ('bras buli rgyud) which is entitled The Tantra of the Perfect Buddhahood
of the the Fruit (ma rgyud thugs rje nyi ma 'bras bu rdzogs sangs gyas pa'i rgyud).
Primordial Buddhahood (ye sangs rgyas) as the Base is present in every sentient being from the very
beginning, but goes unrecognized because of the presence of obscurations and karmic traces, like clouds in
the sky concealing the face of the sun. This presence is termed the Buddhahood of the Base. Manifest
Buddhahood or Buddhahood coming into manifestation along the Path (mngon sangs rgyas) refers to the
process of purification were these obscurations and karmic traces are dissolved, like clouds parting in the
sky so that the face of the sun may occasionally be glimpsed. This represents the Buddhahood of the Path.
Perfect Buddhahood or Buddhahood perfected and completed (rdzogs sangs rgyas), so that it is wholly
revealed, is like the face of the sun clearly visible in the sky devoid of clouds. This represents actual, not
just potential Buddhahood; it is termed the Buddhahood of the Fruit.
3. The Commentaries
Following the texts of the three Tantras comes a general historical cominentary entitled Nyi ma'i dkyil 'khor,
"The Mandala of the Sun", and then eight commentaries on the chapters of the First Tantra, which deal with
such topics as philosophical tenets, cosmology and embryology, the evolution of the psychic channels and
the psychic winds, the mystical letters of the alphabet, the four initiations, the proper view and conduct, and
the four magical activities (phrin las bzhi). These all represent topics pertaining to the Base (gzhi).
Thereafter follow eleven commentaries elucidating the chapters of the Second Tantra, on such topics as
the Ganapuja, the Generation Process (bskyed rim), Mantra Recitation, the Perfection Process (rdzogs rim)
10. In the Yeshen Tantra (ye gshen gyi rgyud), there are five principal Tantras belonging to the class of Father Tantras
(pha rgyud) and eight additional Tantras: (1) Dbal gas mgam pa [sku]. (2) Lha rgod thog pa (gsung]. (3) Gtso
michog mukha' 'gying (thugs]. (4) Dbal chen ge khod [yon fan), (5) Dbal phur nag po (phrin las),
(6) Khro bo ram pa, (7) Khro bo rol pa, (8) Khro bo 'bum pa, (9) Spyidul. (10) Khyung dmar, (11) Khyung nag,
(12) Gsang bu dbyings rol. (13) Rig pa khu byug, (14) Ma rgyud.



Philosophical Systems and the Debate Over Ideas
223
consisting of Psychic Heat (gtum mo), Sleep Practice (gnyid), Dream Practice (rmi lam), Bardo (bar do).
Chod (gcod), and Phowa (pho ha), as well as the Path of Freedom (thar lam) or the preliminary practices,
the Path of Ripening (smin lam) or Samaya vows, and the Path of Liberation (grol lam) or the principal
practices. These are all topics pertaining to the Path. The commentary on the Bardo is no longer extant, nor
is there any commentary provided to the Third Tantra. However, Shardza Rinpoche has written a
commentary on this Third Tantra, entitled the dGongs 'grel.
B. Origin of the Mother Tantra according to the Tradition
1. Miraculous Career of the Prince Mi lus bsam legs
The story or hagiography of the royal prince and Shen practitioner Gyal gshen Mi lus bsam legs is found
in general commentary Nyi ma'i dkyil 'khor.! Said to have been born in Tazik or Central Asia, he received
the instructions for the three cycles of the Mother Tantra from three different sages:
(A) From Gshen spang la nam gshen he received Outer Mother Tantra Cycle of Rnam dag padma
klong gi dkyil 'khor,
(B) from Seng ge'i sgra he received Inner Mother Tantra Cycle of Kun gsal byams ma chen mo'y
rgyud, and
(C) from Lha bon yongs su dag pa he received Secret Mother Tantra Cycle of Thugs rje nyi ma.
Thereafter he is said to have received the full transmission for the secret cycle in a miraculous manner from
the Yogini Bzang za ring btsun, because she was the actual custodian of the Tantra, being considered an
emanation of Shes rab byams ma, the Perfection of Wisdom and Mother of all the Buddhas. This is the Tantra
cycle we have here. From the Royal Shen the lineage of the Mother Tantra was transmitted to Dmu gshen nam
mkha' snang ba'i mdog can of 'Olmo gling (Zhang zhung phug pa or Inner Zhangzhung), then to Pandita A
nu 'phrag thag, the Bonpo of Zhang zhung Bar pa (Middle Zhangzhung or Tazik), and finally to Sad ne ga'u,
the Shenpo of Zhang zhung (Outer Zhangzhung or Northern Tibet). The latter, because of a persecution of Bon,
concealed the texts of the Tantras, entrusting them to the care of Six Dakinis (bya ra ma drug).
2. The Terma Discoveries of Gu ru rNon rtse
According to Bon tradition, there were two persecutions of Bon and its practitioners in Central Tibet. The
first occurred under the seventh Tibetan king Dri gum btsan po (traditional date c. 683 BC) and later in the
8th century under the great Buddhist king Khri srong Ide btsan (c. 783 CE) during which times texts were
hidden away for safe keeping. In later centuries, many of these were recovered and now they form the basis
of the traditions of Yungdrung Bon, otherwise known as Old Bon.
Among these gter ston or "treasure-revealers" was Gu ru rNon rtse in the 12th century (b. 1136). He
is known in Buddhist histories as A ya Bon po lha 'bum and according to Jamgon Kongtrul, he discovered
many Nyingmapa Termas as well as Bonpo ones. He extracted these texts from the rock of Dung phor near
the village of rTa nag on the north side of the Tsangpo river in Tsang province.
11. Oral communication from Lopon Tenzin Namdak.
12. The edition used in this study is the reproduction of an du med manuscript that was brought by Lopon Tenzin
Namdak from Tibet and republished in India by the Bonpo Monastic Center in 1971. It is indexed as K 81 in Per
Kvaerne, "The Canon of the Tibetan Bonpos," Part Two: Index of the Canon, Indo-Iranian Journal, vol. XVI, The
Hague 1974, pp. 9-144.
13. On Mi lus bsam legs, see Daniel Martin, Mandala Cosmology. Human Body Good Thought and the Revelation of
the Secret Mother Tantras of Bon, Asiatische Forschungen Band 124, Harrassowitz Verlag, Wiesbaden 1994.
14. This date is from Sangs rgyas kyi bstan rtsis ngo mtshar nor buli phreng ba by Nyi ma bstan'dzin, Abbot of sMan
ri Monastery, written in 1842. See Per Kvaerne, "A Chronological Table of the Bon-po: The bs Tan reis of Nyi ma
bstan-'jin," in Acta Orientalia, vol. 33, Copenhagen 1971, pp. 205-282.
15. Yon tan rgya mtsho ('Jam mgon Kong sprul) in his Zab mo'i gter dang gter ston grub thoh ji Itar hyon-pa'i lo ryvus
mdor bsdues bkod pa rin chen vaidurya'i phreng ba, f 43a. See Karmay, The Treasury of Good Sayings, ibid., p. 166-167.



224
John Myrdhin Reynolds
C. The Revelation of the Mother Tantra
1. Title and Homage
The title of the First Buddha Tantra is given both in the Zhangzhung language and in Tibetan:
"In the language of Zhang zhung: U ye tha tson ma tra she rkya ni ri ku shu ha sangs kyin tantra, and
in the language of Tibet: Gsang chen mthar thug ma rgyud thugs rje nyi ma gzhi ye sangs rgyas pa'i rgyud,
that is, "The Ultimate Great Secret, the Mother Tantra which is the Sun of Compassion, the Tantra of the
primordial Buddhahood of the Base."
This is followed by the Homage which invokes the Supreme Teacher Kun tu bZang po, the Dharmakaya
and Primordial Buddha, who is the ultimate source of the Tantra teachings and of all revelation.
2. Preface: Setting the Time and Place
The first chapter of the root text is termed a Preface (gleng gzhi) because it sets the scene for the revelation
of the text in terms of time, place, teacher, audience, circumstances and contents of the teaching. The Preface
opens with the formula, "This speech was heard by me at one time," which is the traditional opening for a
Buddhist Sutra. Then the setting and the circumstances for the revelation are presented, traditionally analyzed
into five aspects: the place (gnas), the teacher (ston pa), the audience ('khor), the teaching (bstan pa), and the
time (dus). In this case, the revelation occurs in a transcendent dimension outside of time and history.
3. Epiphany and Revelation
Iconographically, the Supreme Teacher, in this context of revealing the Tantras, appears with seven heads by
means of which, speaking simultaneously, he reveals the various Tantra traditions,
Then there appeared 360 goddesses headed by Zangza Ringtsun, as well as 84,000 Naginis, 990,000
medicine goddesses (sman mo), and hosts of myriads of Dakinis who presented garlands of udumbara
flowers to the Supreme Teacher. They represented the manifestations of the archetypal feminine. She and
the goddesses made the request: "The compassion of the Supreme Teacher is like the sun (in the sky). To
those Buddhas and practitioners who are all simultaneously your disciples, please expound in full the
Mother Tantra, the King among the Secret Mantras, namely, the highest View, by way of elucidating the
philosophical tenets regarding the Base, the clearest Meditation by way of the profound method of the
sadhana of the Path, and the unsurpassed Goal by way of attaining the immediately present Fruit."
Thus, the spiritual path is not only laid out in terms of the Base, Path, and Fruit, as represent by the
principal themes of the three Buddha Tantras, but also in terms of the view (Ita ha), the meditation (sgom
pa) and the conduct (spyod pa).
D. Structure of the Mother Tantra Text
1. Six Bases, Six Paths, and Six Fruits
Kun tu bZang po thereupon issued an edict proclaiming:
(A) The Six Bases (gzhi drug) that are spontaneously perfected (Ihun gyis grub pa) and represent
Primordial Buddhahood (ve sangs rgyas),
(B) the Six Paths (lam drug) that are actualized or realized in terms of siddhis (dngos su grub pa)
and represent the Manifest Buddhahood or Buddhahood coming into manifestation (mngon
sangs rgyas), and
(C) the Six Goals (don drug) that are realized as the Dharmadhatu (dbyings su grub pa) and
represent Prefect Buddhahood (rdzogs sangs rgyas).
These eighteen topics represent the profound teaching on complete liberation" and pertain to the Base, the
Path, and the Fruit respectively. 16 Allotted among them are the forty-five essential points (thig le che inga)
of gnosis or primal cognitions.
16. The Six Bases (gzhi drug) are as follows:
1. The Base of Everything (kun gzhi): philosophical tenets,
2. The Base of Appearances (snag gzhi): evolution and embryology.



Philosophical Systems and the Debate Over Ideas
225
2. Textual Elaborations
Each of these essential points (thig le) is expressed in a phrase having five key words. These form the
content of the revelation in the Root Texts of the three Tantras and are elaborated upon in the commentaries
traditionally said to have been written either by Mi lus bsam legs himself or by Gu ru rNon itse. The
individual chapters may contain one or more of these essential points.
Therefore, the entire Tantra cycle is systematically constructed around this outline:
(A) The Three Buddha Tantras correspond to the Base, Path, and Fruit,
(B) the eighteen topics of the Base, Path, and Fruit,
(C) the forty-five essential points, and
(D) the five key-words in each phrase.
The Ma rGyud is a very complex system in scholastic terms, thus it is not so popular and not so much
practiced among the Bonpos nowadays as are the far more popular Yidam practices of Walse, 'Tsochok, and
Phurpa.17
Part Three: Summary of the Contents of the Ye Shes Thig Le
A. Prologue: The Five Key Words
The Second Chapter of the Root Text is entitled "The Spontaneous Perfected Gnosis (or primal awareness)
of the Basis of Everything, belonging to the Great Mystery Mother Tantra wherein is explained the
Primordial Buddhahood of the Base" (gzhi ye sang rgyas par bshad pal gsang chen ma rgyud/ kun gzhi ye
shes Ihun grub gyi le'u ste gnyis pa). And the Commentary to this chapter, also found in the collection, is
entitled "The Commentary on the Essential Point of Gnosis which teaches the Spontaneous Perfected Gnosis
(or primal awareness) of the Basis of Everything (ye shes thig le'i 'grel pa kun gzhi ye shes thun grub bstan
pa). The title of the sub-commentary on this chapter composed by Lopon Tenzin Namdak is "Illumination
upon the Path to Freedom, annotation and commentary on the Essential Points of Gnosis in the Mother
Tantra" (ma rgyud ye shes thig le'i mchan 'grel that lam rab gsal).
3. The Base of Emptiness (stong gzhi): virtuous qualities of the Four Bodies,
4. The Base of the Transmission (lung gzhi): the initiations,
5. The Base of the Meaning (don gzhi): the view and conduct,
6. The Base of Action (las gzhi): ascetic conduct.
The Six Paths (lam drug) are as follows:
1. The Path of Accumulation (tshogs lam): performing the Ganapuja,
2. The Path of Unification (sbyor lam): practicing the Generation Process,
3. The Path of Vision (mthong lam): practicing mantra recitation,
4. The Path of Meditation (sgom lam): the Perfection Process in 6 Yogas,
5. The Path of Freedom (thar lam): the preliminary practices.
6. The Path of Maturation and Liberation (smin grol lam): main practice,
The Six Goals (don drug) are as follows:
1. The Supreme Fruit (mchog 'bras): explanation of Trikaya,
2. The Fruit of the Meaning (don 'bras): into to Natural State.
3. The Fruit of the meditation Session (thun 'bras): meditation instruction,
4. The Fruit of the State (ngang 'bras): realize compassion and wisdom,
5. The Fruit of the Vast Expanse (klong 'bras): realize the final form,
6. The Fruit of Non-existence (med 'bras): Dharmadhatu and Mahasukha.
17. Oral Communication from Lopon Tenzin Namdak.
18. The root text of Chapter Two is found in folia 13-24 and its commentary in folia 275-296. See Lopon Tenzin
Namdak, Ma rgyud ye shes thig le'i mchan 'grel thar lam rab gsal: An Expository Treatise on Ma Gyud Ye Shes
Thig Le (The Wisdom Spots of Mother Tantra) Text belonging to the Bonpo Tantric System, Bonpo Monastic Centre,
Dolanji HP, n.d.



226
John Myrdhin Reynolds
The prologue which opens this second chapter consists of a dialogue between the Primordial Buddha
Kun tu bZang po and the Primordial Wisdom Kun tu bZang mo, wherein the later requests teachings from
the former: "The gnosis of the philosophical tenets of all the Bon teachings is the basis for all doctrines and
standpoints; therefore, please explain to us the Essential Point of this Gnosis (ye shes thig le)!" Thereupon
Kun tu bZang po issues an edict, proclaiming: "This Essential Point of Gnosis is supreme among what is
correct and clear," (ye shes thig le yang dag gsal ba'i mchog).
As noted above, in the MarGyud text an essential point (thig le) is expressed in five key words, each
of which in turn is expanded into a commentary. According to the commentary, in terms of teaching and
demonstrating the spontaneously perfection of the Base which is the Total Gnosis (ye shes chen po'i gzhi
Thun grub bstan pa), there are five topics:
1. Ye shes: systematically establishing the Gnosis,
2. Thig le: recognizing the real meaning of the Unique Sphere,
3. yang dag: distinguishing among various views or systems of philosophical tenets,
4. gsal ba: focusing of the clarity of the senses (as valid cognitions), and
5. mchog: explanation of our own scripture, the Mother Tantra, which is the supreme system among
philosophical tenets.
B. The Five Topics
1. First Topic: The Great Gnosis of the Base
The First Topic is that of systematically establishing the Gnosis of the Base which represents the Ultimate
Truth. The first two topics present the essential view of the Ma Gyud, namely, the Base (gzhi), which is a
state beyond cause and effect. According to the Commentary, this Total Gnosis which is the Base abides as
spontaneously perfected (gzhi ye shes chen po thun grub du gnas pa). Nevertheless, the Dimension of all
Existence and the intrinsic Awareness of the Nature of Mind are inseparable from the very beginning (bon
nyid dbyings dang sems nyid rig pa dbyer med). Therefore, they represent two sides of a single Ultimate
Reality. In this way, the text seeks to establish the gnosis or knowledge of the Base in terms of Ultimate
Truth. However, this Base is not something that can be known like an external object because it is Awareness
in itself.
2. Second Topic: The Unique Sphere
The second topic is the recognition that the above Base is the Unique Sphere (thig le nyag gcig). Therefore,
the Base, which is the state of Shunyata, represents the totality of both existence and non-existence. But
Shunyata or emptiness is not just absence or a mere nothingness (stong pa phyal chad), because Shunyata
and Awareness (rig pa) have been inseparable from time without beginning. Their inseparability (dbyer med)
is the fundamental principle asserted here, and thereby the Ma Gyud seeks to avoid the danger of the one-
sidedness expressed, for example, in Madhyamaka and in Chittamatra.
Moreover, the Base is precisely the same in an enlightened Buddha and in an ordinary deluded sentient
being. There is no difference in terms of their essence; this Base is the Nature of Mind which is the source
for both Samsara and Nirvana. The difference between an enlightened being and an ignorant being is
whether or not one recognizes and understands this Primordial Base,
3: Third Topic: The Discussion of Philosophical Systems
(A) Ontology and Epistemology
The third topic is the making of special distinctions with regard to the correctness of the views of others,
including both the views of Outsiders or Tirthikas and the views of Insiders, whether Buddhists or Bonpos.
Because of the power of ignorance, there arise three causes for impurity in terms of view, namely, delusion,
obscuration, and deviation ('khrul sgrib gol gsum). The Outsiders or Tirthikas are deluded ('khrul pa).
possessing deluded views, because their philosophical ideas are erroneous, being afflicted with either
eternalism (rtag pa) or nihilism (chad pa).



Philosophical Systems and the Debate Over Ideas
227
The Insiders are divided into the Causal Bon (rgyu bon) and the Fruitional Bon ('bras bon) within the
Bonpo tradition itself. But some among these Insiders are obscured (sgrib pa), for they do not understand
the Base and therefore they practice the Lower Vehicles. However, some other Insiders have deviated ('gol
ba), wherein their views appear rather similar to the correct understanding, as found in the MarGyud, but
they deviate because they meditate in a wrong way. According to the Commentary, our own view of the
great spontaneously perfected Gnosis of the Base" (gzhi ye shes thun grub chen po) is the highest view
among the nine systems of philosophical tenets represented by the Nine Ways of Bon. It is even more exalted
than the tenet systems of the Tantras (whether A dkar or Ye gshen) and even of the Dzogchen found in the
Zhang zhung snyan rgyud.
Now the text proceeds to examine seven systems of philosophical tenets (grub mtha'), criticizing each and
demonstrating their deficiencies while showing that the view of the Ma Gyud is superior. This is done by
(1) dgag pa: negating and refuting the opponent's assertions,
(2) gzhag pa: establishing one's own tenets or position, and
(3) spong ba: purifying one's own tenets, making them clear and refuting the criticisms of them
by the opponent, thereby justifying one's own position.
(B) The Individual Philosophical Systems Considered
(1) Theistic View of the Shaivites
The Tirthika Outsiders adhere to an erroneous philosophical notion of a God called Maheshvara whom they
define in terms of five theological assertions: (a) He is unique and single; (b) he pervades everywhere; (c)
he is eternal; (d) he is beyond sorrow (Samsara); (e) he is an unconditioned entity, abiding even after death.
These assertions are refuted logically one by one.
(2) Views of the Causal Bon
The three Causal Ways (rgyu'i theg pa) of Phywa gshen theg pa, sNang gshen theg pa, and Srid gshen theg
pa are treated as a group; their perspectives represent philosophical views that are obscured (sgrib pa'i grub
mtha), rather than deluded or completely erroneous. In essence, it is a question of the relationship of cause
and effect. And their views are dualistic: they adhere to a naive realism and harbor a belief in the reality of
the ego. The view of 'Phrul gshen theg pa is criticized separately, but much on the same basis regarding its
dualistic thinking.
(3) Views of the Phanyulwas
Now we come to the Fruitional Ways, beginning with the Ways of Lay Practitioners and Monks (dge bsnyed
dang drang srong); they are also known as the Phanyulwas (phan yul ba). Phanyul refers to the principal
Sutra system of Fruitional Bon, that is to say, the Prajnaparamita. These two ways assert that all effects result
from causes. Over many kalpas, one can purify obscurations and accumulate merit by way of the practice
of the ten perfections. One progresses gradually and when the kleshas become exhausted, eventually one
will realize Buddhahood. This gradualist approach represents the obscured views of Insiders and the critique
refers especially to their view of causality.
(4) View of "Mind-Only" in the Tantras of the Yeshenpas
Now the deviated views of Insiders who follow the Tantras are considered. Within the Greater Vehicle
(Mahayana) of the Tantras, there are said to be four deviated positions which are asserted as philosophical
tenets regarding the Ultimate Reality. These are presented here and below. Note that in the Bon system of
classification, Chittamatra (sems tsam) and Madhyamaka (dhu ma) are associated with the followers of the
Tantras, rather than with the Sutras, as is the case with Buddhism.
This first group of Tantric practitioners known as Yeshenpas (ve gshen pa) assert that all appearances
or phenomena are Mind-Only (snang ba thams cad sems tsam) and that when Mind is purified, it becomes
the state of Buddhahood. For this to occur, the Mind relies on the methods of the Secret Mantras, that is, the
Tantric transformational practices of the Generation Process (bskyed rim) and the Perfection Process (rdzogs
rim). Because all phenomenal existence is only mind and thought, being empty and without a self, by
purifying phenomena into their lack of inherent nature, the purified Mind becomes Buddhahood.



228
John Myrdhin Reynolds
To these assertions, the MarGyud replies that "mind," although empty, is not Buddhahood because it
is the support of karma. Moreover, this mind or Alayavijnana is where the seeds of all kleshas are produced
and stored, even though they abide as empty in terms of their essence. The Ma Gyud asserts that the
Chittamatra position does not distinguish between sems and ye shes, thinking that they are one. Therefore,
one cannot attain enlightenment because the Alayavijnana is contaminated by these karmic causes.
Furthermore, it is conditioned and impermanent
However, according to Lopon Tenzin Namdak's sub-commentary, the Yeshenpas are not true
Chittamatrins, but actually follow a kind of Madhyamaka, though not the Prasangika version. This would
appear to be the syncretistic school of Yogachara-Svatantrika Madyamaka that flourished in Tibet in the 8-
11th centuries before the texts of Chandrakirti were translated into Tibetan.
(5) View of Kunzhi among the Ponsepas (Followers of Dzogchen)
According to the text, some practitioners belonging to the Mahayana (Tantra system) cling to philosophical
tenets, asserting that the Kunzhi (kun gzhi) is the Base or the Ultimate Reality. They further assert that the
Adibuddha Kun tu bZang po understood the Kunzhi, so he alone was liberated from the very beginning. This
Kunzhi is unconditioned, so if one understands it, one attains Buddhahood. The Kunzhi according to
Ultimate Truth is similar to the clear open sky. It is all-encompassing and totally all-pervading. Self-
awareness (rang rig) is similar to the sun rising in the sky. Manas or the functional mind (yid) is like the
coming and going of the winds and clouds. Sense consciousnesses (dbang shes) are pure self-manifestations
like rainbows. The Kunzhi is source of everything and everything again dissolves into this dimension of pure
awareness.
However the MarGyud criticizes this view. These Ponsepas (dpon gsas pa) fail to distinguish the
Kunzhi from the Alayavijnana (kun gzhi rnam shes) which is the support for the karmic traces (bag chags)
that come to contaminate it. The Ma Gyud then establishes its own case. Gnosis in Ultimate Truth is
immaterial and insubstantial; it does not fall into any limitations or extremes. The Base which is our view,
namely, Total Gnosis, transcends this Base which is their view. Even though as the Base it is one, Kunzhi is
the base of the other vehicles as well, but Ma Gyud is the vehicle of the Base which is the Great Gnosis and
teaches correctly the Base of the Primordial State.
According to the sub-commentary of Lopon Tenzin Namdak, the Ponsepas belonging to the Mahayana
Tantra system indicated here refer to the practitioners of the Zhangzhung Nyangyud tradition. The texts of
the Zhangzhung Nyangyud often use the term Kunzhi for the Natural State of the Nature of Mind (sems nyid
gnas lugs). However, the Ma Gyud criticizes this implication, saying that this Kunzhi cannot be self-aware
gnosis (rang rig ye shes) because these practitioners fail to distinguish the Kunzhi (kun gzhi) from the
Alayavijnana (kun gzhi rnam shes), which is the support of karmic traces. Therefore, the enlightenment of
the Buddha would be contaminated by them. The effect would return to the cause and the Buddha would fall
back again into the delusions of Samsara. But the Dzogchenpas reply in the sub-commentary that they do in
fact distinguish between the Kunzhi and the Alayavijnana and that the Kunzhi, being primordially pure in
itself, is indeed the basis for both Samsara and Nirvana, not just the base for karmic traces. Therefore,
according to the Lopon, this criticism of the Zhangzhung Nyangyud by the MarGyud does not stand.
(6) View of Shunyata in Madhyamaka
According to Lopon Tenzin Namdak, the view that Shunyata represents a total nothingness (stong phyal
chad gyi la ba) refers to the position of the Prasangika Madhyamikas who are seen as falling on to the side
of nihilism (chad Ita ba).
However, this Shunyata which is free of extremes (stong pa mtha' bral) is very similar to our own
Dzogchen (rdzogs chen rang lugs) in the MarGyud, but the former tends to fall into the deviation of nihilism,
the assertion that nothing exists. According to the text, the Prasangika Madhyamikas assert as a philosophical
tenet the Shunyata where absolutely nothing at all exists (grub mtha' stong pa phyal chad). Therefore, there
is no Ultimate Reality and consequently no Buddhahood to be attained. All appearances are visible to
individual sentient beings only and they erroneously impute reality to them, for example, like reflections seen
in a mirror. To this the MarGyud replies: Even though this Shunyata is indeed similar to our view, yet it



Philosophical Systems and the Debate Over Ideas
229
suffers from four defects (zad shor phyal chad skyon bzhi), namely: (a) exhaustion (zad pa), where visible
appearances are devoid of gnosis or primal cognitions, like someone unconscious after fainting: (b)
disappearance or loss (shor ba), where everything dissolves and disappears into Shunyata, like the spaced-
out condition of the Arupadhatu Devas; (c) total nothingness (phyal ha), where nothing exists at all, being
just like empty space; (d) annihilation (chad pa) or nihilism like the Outsider view of the materialists.
The Natural State is self-occurring and spontaneously perfected (thun grub rang babs kyi gnas lugs),
but Prasangikas do not assert that this is the Ultimate Reality and because that is not asserted, there is no
Buddhahood to be attained. For the Prasangikas, this Shunyata alone is the Ultimate Truth, but this is not
the case for those who practice the Tantras. In Madhyamaka, the two-fold Rupakaya is asserted to appear
because of the power of the accumulation of merit. However, because it manifests naturally and
spontaneously according to our system of the Ma Gyud, it cannot be just nothing (stong pa sam gyi med).
The Natural State is not just primordial purity or Shunyata, it is equally luminous clarity and spontaneously
perfection. These two sides have been inseparable from the very beginning and there is no cause for this,
such as the accumulation of merit. Moreover, Rigpa may be interrupted (or temporarily diminished), but it
can never fall into exhaustion nor annihilation. Here there is found a contradiction between Madhyamaka
and Dzogchen according to the sub-commentary,
(7) View of the Jnyanasattva in the Tantras of the Akarwas
The Akarwas expound the doctrine of the Wisdom Being or Jnyanasattva. They assert that, when they
practice meditation, this deity is invoked as "a Deity of Gnosis who guides the mind", which comes from
elsewhere or which resides in the dimension of the Dharmadhatu. And because one practices this unification
of Wisdom Being (ye shes pa) and Symbolic Being (dam tshig pa), one comes to attain Buddhahood.
The philosophical tenets asserted by some Akarwas and some Chathunpas of the Mahayana belong only
to a section of the Secret Mantras system. The terms Akarwa (a dkar ba) and Chathunpa (cha mthun pa)
indicate the practitioners of Kriya Tantra and Charya Tantra respectively. In general the term Akarwa refers
to practitioners of the Lower Tantras and the term Yeshenpas to practitioners of the Higher Tantras. But
while the Lower Tantras possess the method of the Unyanasattva, they do not possess the methods of the
generation and the perfection processes found only in the Higher Tantras. Thus, the criticism found here
applies only to the Akarwa view.
According to the MarGyud, if one does not know that the Jnyanasattva has existed within oneself from
the very beginning, and only now one remembers and clearly visualizes it, but thinks that it comes from
outside, it will not be possible for the Jnyanasattva and Samayasattva to merge into one. It will be like trying
to mix water and oil. Rather, according to the MarGyud, the Jnyanasattva is self-awareness of oneself as
the Yidam or meditation deity: it is only that one has forgotten it. Therefore, Tantric sadhana represents a
method for remembering oneself as the Yidam by way of the practices of the generation process and the
perfection process.
In conclusion, according to the text, even though elsewhere in the other Lower Vehicles, the view of
the Base has been afflicted with delusion, obscuration, and deviation, the Base in itself, as expounded in the
MarGyud, is immaculate and self-originated. This Base is Primordial Buddhahood, the Nature of Mind, and
the Primordial State of Kun tu bZang po.
4. Fourth Topic: Clarity (Epistemology)
(A) Clarity and the Senses
The term clarity (gsal ba) refers to the unimpaired functioning of the senses and to direct perception (mngon
sum). Because it is experienced by the primal cognitions of self-awareness (rang rig pa'i ye shes), it is said
to be clear (gsal ha). The basis for clarity is the Total Gnosis which is self-originated (rang byung ye shes).
If this were not clear, no other clarity would be possible. Everything in the world would be in total darkness,
like there being no sun in the sky. This represents the clarity of the gnosis of self-awareness.



230
John Myrdhin Reynolds
(B) The Necessity for Valid Cognitions of Direct Perceptions
The gnosis of the Base is made clear in this way. But if one wants to focus on it, it is necessary to engage
in Pramana or valid cognitions (tshad ma). How can one understand correctly the view when one thinks
wrongly? One will not overcome doubts; therefore one must use valid cognitions in order to be free of error
and defects.
It is necessary to understand by means of a valid cognition of direct perception (mngon sum tshad ma)
where one attains a thought that understands the object from proof of sufficient reason (siddhapaksha, sgrub
phyogs). In this way, one can evaluate the fruits of Samsara and Nirvana. Furthermore, the method of direct
perception (pratyaksha, mngon sum) is applied within the Four Portals, whereas understanding by way of
inference (anumana, rjes dpag) is applied in the Treasury.
(C) Direct Perception in the Four Portals of Bon
According to the Commentary, each of the Four Portals (hon sgo bzhi) has its proper activity. The sub-
commentary asserts that it is necessary to apprehend the ultimate Natural State by means of the valid
cognition of direct perception (or immediate intuition) because the Ultimate Reality transcends conception
by the intellect and expression in words. The method for understanding by way of direct perception is
represented by the Four Portals and there are four modes of direct perception to be considered here:
(1) With the fleshly eye one sees colors,
(2) with the eye of Manas one sees activities or karma,
(3) with eye of clear self-awareness one see gnosis (ye shes), and
(4) with the eye of the Nature of Mind one sees the Dharmakaya.
If the Natural State is only understood by self-awareness, does this not make the other three valid cognitions
unnecessary and without purpose? Not according to the Commentary because one needs to know right
actions, renounce the emotional defilements, obtain a human body, understand the view, and free our own
system of tenets from defects.
(1) Chab nag
Direct perception by the sense faculties (dbang po'i mngon sum) is the method of apprehension proper to
Chab nag, that is to ritualism, magic and exorcism. The sense faculties only perceive a Relative Truth which
distinguishes good and bad. Indeed, Chab nag was taught for sake of people with inferior faculties.
Therefore, karma and scripture (las lung) were not taught here because the Chagnagpas conduct themselves
in accordance with the everyday kleshas or emotional defilements.
Moreover, one should not confuse the direct perception in Chab nag with the Thodgal practice in
Dzogchen. According to the sub-commentary, the Dzogchenpa may also rely on the senses for visions in
terms of Thodgal practice, but what one sees in this case is gnosis. The Chagnagpa possesses only the fleshly
eye, not eye of gnosis (ve shes kyi spyan).
(2) 'Phan Vu
Direct perception by means of Manas (vid kyi mngon sum) apprehends 'Phan yul, the Prajnaparamita Sutra
system. It apprehends valid cognitions as spiritual forms visible only to consciousness, but not to the
material eye. 'Phan yul was taught for sake of people with middling capacity. It teaches conduct that
renounces the kleshas by way of ten virtues, thereby actions brought under control and kleshas renounced.
Indeed, one creates some good karma, but still one grasps, especially there is grasping at a mental body.
Nevertheless, it apprehends the mental body (vid kvi lus), karmic traces, spiritual forms such as the moral
precepts, and so on. Thereby one is able to guard one's vows.
(3) Chah dkar
Direct perception by way of self-awareness (rang rig mngon sum) enters into the real meaning of Chab dkar,
the real subject matter of the Tantra system (a dkar theg pa). It does not perceive or accept as Ultimate Truth
the objects of mind of the Lower Vehicles. It is taught for the benefit of people of superior intellectual
capacity. The fruit is the obtaining of a divine body possessing direct perception by way of self-awareness.
This mind-made illusion body (sgyu lus), comprised of mind and subtle prana, is the result of Yidam practice



Philosophical Systems and the Debate Over Ideas
231
and represents the culmination of the Tantric process of transformation. Nevertheless, this is still illusion and
not the Ultimate Truth.
(4) dPon gsas
Direct perception by way of the Nature of Mind (sems nyid mngon sum), according to the Ponsepas, comes
to understand the Jnanakaya. It is taught for sake of people of exceedingly superior intellectual capacity. This
represents the immediate intuition of the Ultimate Truth.
According to the sub-commentary, this represents the Portal of the Upadeshas. Its activity is samadhi or
contemplation and this intuition cuts the roots of the emotional defilements at their source. The deluded
minds of the eight lower vehicles still engage in thinking, but self-originated gnosis sees clearly without
thoughts and concepts. Even though self-awareness arises clearly, making the eight other vehicles into its
helpers, still these eight levels of thoughts are deluded and represent discursive thoughts, so there exists the
necessity for the ninth vehicle beyond the mind and beyond discursive thoughts.
(D) Inference Associated with the Treasury
The Treasury is investigated by way of the valid cognitions of inference (anumana pramana, rjes pag shad
ma); whereupon one will come to understand it by way of pure discriminating wisdom (shes rab). When
practicing the Treasury, matters are not seen by direct perception, but evaluated in terms of inference. And
in terms of inference, one comes to understand by way of sufficiency, engagement, and reversal:
(1) Sufficiency (zhug pa) apprehends a single sufficient reason or cause (pakshadharma, phyogs bon),
with respect to the object of knowledge. For example, "Where there is smoke, there is fire." Smoke is the
sufficient reason to infer the existence of fire, though the fire is not directly perceived.
(2) As for engagement (jug pa), because one becomes habitual in the employing of examples of its
occurrence, subsequently one becomes certain. For example, smoke always accompanies the fire in a stove.
This represents positive pervasion (anvaya-vyapti, rjes khyab).
(3) As for reversal (Idog pa), here one cites the opposite case. When circumstances do not agree with
this assertion (or paksha), then it does not exist with respect to the sufficient reason. "If there is no fire, then
smoke cannot exist, as for example, fire is not possible in the ocean, therefore there is no smoke there." This
represents negative pervasion (vyatireka-vyapti, Idog khyab). Thereby inference is arranged systematically
and by relying on these three methods (Ishul gsum), one comes to understand the object by means of
inference.
(E) Defects of Mind
For the Chagnagpa, the natural disposition of the senses is deluded because of the presence of karmic traces.
Appearances are quickly regarded as enemies and one feels threatened by the spirits, whereupon angry
thoughts arise.
In terms of mental perception for the Phanyulwa, the deluded mind suffers in Samsara. But this deluded
mind is deceived by the Manas, the three humors, and the eight classes of spirits, and so on.
In terms of direct perception of self-awareness as valid cognition for the Chabkarwa, the natural
disposition of self-awareness may become deluded, thinking the world is like a dream or illusion and
becoming obsessed with the signs of practice, such as visions and omens.
Direct perception by way of the Nature of Mind is the valid cognition of Ponsepas who practice
Dzogchen. Yet they may also enter into delusion by way of grasping at the characteristics of objects and by
distractions of mind due to one's own awareness, such as appearances moving during the most-meditation
experience (rjes thob).
5. Fifth Topic: The Supreme Philosophical System
Finally, there is the explanation of our own scripture (the Ma Gyud) which is the supreme philosophical
system. And among all Bases, it is the Base of the Ye shes thig le which is supreme and this Base is the Total
Gnosis (ye shes chen po).



232
John Myrdhin Reynolds
According to the view of the Total Gnosis in our own system, what is looked at is self-originated gnosis
(rang byung ye shes) and the one who looks is self-aware gnosis (rang rig ye shes). This instruction on the
method for non-deceived looking (lta thabs mi bslu ba'i gdams ngag) explicates the other philosophical
systems and thereby conceptual elaborations are cut off. And because it teaches the method of looking as a
valid cognition, doubts are pacified. When one cleanses the defects of perverted and deluded thoughts, then
no basis for delusion remains. The self-originated gnosis of the Base is systematically established by means
of scripture citations and by reasoning (lung dang rig pa); this produces a certain knowledge (nges shes),
cleansing the defects of mind by means of valid cognitions. Thereby one comes to directly apprehend the
real meaning of the Natural State. By means of the gnosis of self-awareness, one understands the self-
originated gnosis of the Base.
Part Four: Concluding Discussion
Terma represents a process of continuing revelation, a link with the primordial past, the time of the
beginning when the Dharma was first revealed to humanity. Thus, the Ma Gyud is placed in the mouth of
the Primordial Buddha Kun tu bZang po. Linked to the original source of the sacred, Terma brings the sacred
to bare on contemporary questions. By way of this Terma, Gu ru rNon rtse provided the Bonpos with a
Mother Tantra presented as a primordial revelation and, therefore, a scripture of ultimate authority.
The MarGyud represents a well planned and elaborated scholastic literature, in contrast to the "lecture
notes" style of certain Buddhist Tantras of Indian origin, such as the Hevajra Tantra. Indeed, the MarGyud
represents a scholastic project of intellectual synthesis reminiscent of the Buddhist Kalachakra Tantra,
sometimes also classified as a Mother Tantra. In this period of the 11th and 12th centuries, the Anuttara
Tantras, especially the Heruka Tantras or Mother Tantras, were introduced as new translations from Sanskrit
into Tibetan and they grew in popularity among Tibetan schools and monasteries. For example, one may
speak of the prominence of the New Tantra translations of the Hevajra Tantra of Virupa and 'Brog mi among
the Sakyapas and the Chakrasamvara Tantra of Tilopa and Naropa among the Kagyudpas. The discoveries
of Gu ru rNon rtse provided the Bonpos with a Mother Tantra of their own, complete with sophisticated
Dzogrim techniques, and a discussion of systems of philosophical tenets, as well as of logic and
epistemology, precisely at the time when all this was the intellectual fashion among the Tibetan Buddhists.
Moreover, this Bonpo Mother Tantra seeks to provide a synthesis of the entire Bonpo Tantra system that
complements and goes beyond the older Father Tantras and which comprehensively develops Dzogrim
practice. This was the time when Mother Tantra was in the air; its psychic technology was "hot," with its
principal emphasis on Dzogrim practices such as Tummo, and so on. Consequently, the Ma rGyud has the
most extensive Dzogrim section found in any Bonpo Tantra
Also in this era of the New Translations, the Prasangika Madhyamaka system was introduced into Tibet
by Spa tshab Lo tswa ba Nyi ma grags, who translated the principal texts of this system into Tibetan,
including the famous Prasannapada of Chandrakirti. A native of Phanyul, Spa tshab Lo tswa ba went to
Kashmir as a boy in 1137. Gu ru rNon rtse being born the year before in 1136. The former studied with many
scholars in India for twenty-three years and returning to Tibet, he taught the six treatises of Nagarjuna and
translated the Prasannapada and the Madhyamakavatara with its autocommentary. He gathered about him
many disciples. In time Prasangika Madhyamaka became the intellectual fashion in Tibet and replaced the
earlier ecclectic Yogachara-Svatantrika Madhyamaka of Shantirakshita. Even today Prasangika
Madhyamaka is the official philosophy and party line of all the Tibetan schools, including the Nyingmapas
and Bonpos, at least in terms of Sutra system studies.
But some Indian and Tibetan Buddhist philosophers felt the need on occasion to adopt the Svatantrika
mode of argument in order to establish Shunyata. These scholars accepted the Madhyamaka view regarding
the Ultimate Truth, but the Yogachara or Sautrantika view with regard to phenomena. This is true of the
19. George Roerich, The Blue Annals, Part I-II, Motilal Banarsidass, New Delhi reprint 1979, pp. 230, 236, 272, 341-
2, 344, 350.



Philosophical Systems and the Debate Over Ideas
233
eclectic school of Shantirakshita. The style of argument in early Dzogchen texts and here in the Ma Gyud
is more connected with this Yogachara-Svatantrika Madhyamaka trend where one can employ independent
arguments, syllogisms, and valid cognitions in the discussion with opponents. Therefore, one may speak in
a more positive way regarding the Ultimate Reality, such as, for example, "total primordial purity" (ka dag
chen po), without falling into the extreme of eternalism or substantializing reality.
What is the difference in the view of Shunyata between Madhyamaka and Dzogchen? According to the
sub-commentary, although Shunyata corresponds to primordial purity (ka dag), Dzogchen does not separate
this from spontaneous perfection (thun grub). Shunyata is not simply an inert vacuum: Thun grub represents
its energetic side. Moreover, in the Sutra system, one apprehends Shunyata as a concept, whereas in
Dzogchen, it remains an immediate experience. In Sutra, one's search for Shunyata never ends. This
represents grasping at Shunyata (stong pa 'dzin pa), whereas Dzogchen does not grasp at Shunyata. This
Sutric knowledge of Shunyata is inferential; it is not a direct perception. According to Sutra, one must go
through an inferential cognition to get at Shunyata, but according to Dzogchen, one cannot use concepts to
go beyond concepts. Just as one cannot wash blood off one's hands with more blood. The only way to
understand Shunyata is to have no inferential cognitions - the only way is by means of Rigpa and this
understanding represents a direct perception or immediate intuition that is beyond words.
In 6th century, Dignaga rejected the five member syllogism of Nyaya logic as being clumsy and
defective and formulated a different three member syllogism which was more formal in terms of the criteria
for the validity of arguments. The Ma Gyud and other contemporary Bonpo texts employ this syllogism of
Dignaga (tshul gsum). However, the MarGyud asserts that this syllogism was not an innovation of Dignaga,
building on an earlier human tradition of logic, but a direct revelation of the Primordial Buddha Kun tu bZan
gpo himself. Thus, the Bonpo tradition attributes Buddhistic logic to the Primordial Buddha, not to Dignaga
and Dharmakirti, and claims that its logic is older.
In this period, logic, epistemology, and philosophical tenets were discussed and elaborated at Sa skya.
It was the leading Tibetan monastic university of the time. Open to the new Indian Buddhist influences,
especially in terms of Anuttara Tantra, Sa skya also became foremost in the development of logic and
epistemology in the Tibetan context. The impact of this new logic and epistemology is clearly seen in the
Ma rGyud. Bonpo monastic education in terms of mTshan nyid, or philosophy,20 with the emphasis on
Madhyamaka, Tarka, and Pramana, and its training in and examination through debate for its Geshes
nowadays appears very similar to the Gelugpa educational system. Geshes from Man ri monastery were
sent to Drepung in the last centuries for their post-graduate studies and to sharpen their debating skills. But
in the 11th through 13th centuries, the Bonpo Geshes were sent to Sa skya, which at that time was at the
center of intellectual developments in Tibet. Among the Bonpos, g. Yas ru dBen sa kha was the principal
center of Bonpo scholastic activity. It thrived under the patronage of the Dru clan, just as Sa skya did under
the 'Khon family. The two monasteries were located close to each other geographically in the Tsang region.
Thus, the MarGyud, as we have it here, appears to be very much a product of the 11th and 12th centuries
renaissance in Central Tibet. If not the actual author of the root texts, Gu ru rNon rtse was certainly
instrumental in editing them and compiling their commentaries, a fact witnessed by his complaining of
weariness over struggling with the Terma text to his disciple Zhonnu Bum. The later was probably the author
of the general commentary that follows the root texts.
20. See Krystyna Cech, "History, Teaching, and Practice of Dialectics according to the Bon Tradition," in Tibet Journal
11, no. 2, 1986, pp.3-28.



THE WRITINGS OF
ZHABS DKAR TSHOGS DRUG RANG GROL (1781-1851).
A DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUE
Matthieu Ricard
Since the publication of the English translation of the autobiography of Shabkar (zhabs dkar), almost all the
writings of this great master have been rediscovered - chiefly at his seat in the valley of Rebkong (reb gong)
in the province of Amdo (a mdo) in north-eastern Tibet, but also in central Tibet and Nepal. As a result of
collaboration between the holders of Shabkar's lineage in Amdo, and Shechen (zhe chen) monastery in
Nepal, the creation of a complete edition of the Collected Writings has now become possible. This has been
published both in the Qinhai province in a 12 volume book edition) and in India (in a 14 volume dpe cha
edition) by Shechen Publications, in 2003.
According to an inventory of the Writings (see SH 179) once preserved in Shabkar's own library at his
seat at Yama Tashikhyil (g.ya'ma bkra shis 'khyil), it appears that, save for a few minor texts and an anthology
of quotations (SH 102), all the major works have been recovered. In view of this, and in the interests of future
research, it seemed useful to create a numerical referencing system for the works now available.
The present catalogue includes one hundred and eighty titles from Shabkar's Collected Works (SH 1 to
180, see dkar chag SH 180), a number of manuscripts of early editions of various texts that were later
included in the Works (SH-MAN 1-7), and some supplementary texts (rgyab chos, TP 1-13) from the rta
phag vid bzhin nor bu cycle of teachings rediscovered by Terchen Kunzang Dechen Gyalpo (gter chen kun
bzang bde chen rgyal po, born in 1736).
It is particularly appropriate that this catalogue is published in a volume in homage to Gene Smith, since
it was Gene who first opened our eyes to the works of Shabkar in the 1970's, by telling us that Shabkar's
rnam thar was, in his opinion, the most inspiring biography in Tibetan literature.
***
Although we have not discovered an ordered list of Shabkar's writings that might have been created during
his lifetime, a manuscript inventory of his works has survived. Furthermore, with a few notable exceptions,
most of the major texts are also mentioned and dated in Shabkar's autobiography or other writings
In 1988, Jigme Thekchog (jigs med theg mchog - 1951-2001), an eminent scholar from rong po dgon
chen who had been the tutor of Shabkar's 4th incarnation, included a partial list of the master's writings in
his history of rong po monastery. Subsequently, in 1993, the late Pal Gyalkar (dpal rgyal mkhar) compiled
a more extensive list and a collection of excerpts of Shabkar's works, together with an excellent analysis of
his style. This is at the moment best study of Shabkar in the Tibetan language. The Shechen edition of
1. Ricard, Matthieu, Jakob Leschly, Erik Schmidt, Marilyn Silverstone & Ani Lodro Palmo, (trans.), and Constance
Wilkinson (ed.), The Life of Shabkar, The Autobiography of a Tibetan Yogi, S.U.N.Y. Press, 1994, reprinted by
Snow Lion, 2001
2. In his rong po dgon chen gyi gdan rabs rdzogs Idan gtam gyi rang sgrags (Xining: Qinghai Nationalities Press,
1988. p. 646), jigs med theg mchog considers twenty-two major works of zhabs dkar, nine sprul pa'i glegs bam,
four legs bshad, three chos hshad, three ita mgur and four mani mgur (autobiographical songs). In a later personal
communication, he structured the main works in nine sprul pa'i glegs bam, three chos bshad, three legs bshad, three
gdams ngag and three lta ba'i mgur, which is the order we have followed in the present edition.
3. Pal Gyalkar (dpal rgyal mkhar, d. 2000): "bya gtang chen po zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol ba'i phyag rtsom
gyi che ba bzhad pa z me tog." In bod kyi shes rig dpyad risom phyogs bsgrigs blo gsal bung ba 'dren pa'i dpyid
kyi pho nya, Beijing: China Tibetology Publishing House (krung go'i bod kyi shes rig dpe skrun khang), 1992,
vol. 3: 1-56. From the same author, see also rje zhabs dkar ba'i mgur glu'i bsam blo'i rang bzhin skor rags gleng
ba. In krung go'i bod kyi shes rig, 1989, 4: 132-40.



The Writings of Zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol
235
Shabkar's work was made possible through the dedicated efforts and collaboration of Urgyen Jigme Tenpa'i
Gyaltsen (o rgyan 'jigs med bstan pa'i rgyal mishan), Shabkar's fourth incarnation, born in 1980; of Tenpa
Gyatso (bstan pa rgya mtsho), a senior monk of Yama Tashikhyil (8.ya ma bkra shis 'khyil); of Yundrung
Gyal (8.yung drung rgyal), the nephew of the famous scholar Gendun Chöpel (dge 'dun chos 'phel); of
Jigme Thekchog Vigs med theg mchog), mentioned above, and Konchog Palmo, (dkon mchog dpal mo) a
western disciple of Kyabje Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche (skyabs rje dil mgo mkhyen brtse rin po che, 1910-
1991), all of whom have been active over the years in gathering Shabkar's writings in the Rebkong area. We
ourselves visited the area on three separate occasions. We were also given a number of texts found in
northern Nepal by Sengdrak Rinpoche (seng 'grags rin po che) and Pema Gyurme (padma 'gyur med).
Through these combined efforts, almost the whole of Shabkar's works have been collected and preserved.
In the case of many of the texts, excellent wood-blocks were kept at the temple-hermitage of Yama
Tashikhyil (8.ya'ma bkra shis 'khyil) - henceforth referred to as TK - near Showong (zho 'ong, nowadays
pronounced "sho-pong") in Rebkong. The carving of most of them was organized by Sangye Rinchen (sangs
rgyas rin chen), one of the author's close disciples. Although these wood-blocks were burned during the
Cultural Revolution, at least one print of each volume has survived. Several volumes of manuscripts, some
of which are in Shabkar's own hand, have also been preserved in the same area.
Xylographs for a few volumes were also carved at Shugsep (shug gseb) monastery in central Tibet
under the auspices of the famous lady teacher Shugsep Jetsun Chönyi Sangmo (shug gseb rje brsun chos
nyid bzang mo - 1852-1953), who was a holder of Shabkar's teachings and transmitted them in the central
provinces, Alas, these xylographs were also destroyed and only a few prints have survived.
According to word of mouth information from Khetsun Sangpo Rinpoche (mkhas btsun bzang po rin
po che), several manuscript volumes of Shabkar's works were preserved at Parthang Rinchen Ding (bar
thang rin chen Iding) at the foot of the mountain of Jomo Kharak (jo mo kha rag) in central Tibet, the
residence for several years of Shabkar's close disciple Kalden Rangdrol (skal Idan rang grol). This
monastery was destroyed with all its treasures.
A few manuscripts of Shabkar's writings were passed down through his disciple Jinpa Norbu (sbyin pa
nor bu), who lived with Shabkar on Mount Kailash, in Lapchi (la phyi) and elsewhere. Holders of Jinpa
Norbu's lineage have preserved these manuscripts in Dolpo Tarap in Nepal.
The xylographic edition of Shabkar's writings was arranged in ten volumes identified by the Tibetan
letters Ka through Ta, the last volume being marked Om. This collection begins with the two volumes of
Shabkar's autobiography, continues with the mgur 'bum followed by the general Mahayana teachings and
concludes with texts on the Vajrayana and rdzogs chen. Many important works, on the other hand, are
without alphabetical reference and existed only in manuscript form.
A few volumes of writings were published in India in the 1970's and 80's. Some of these were reprinted
from xylographic prints of the TK edition, others from the often flawed manuscripts found in northern Nepal.
In 1985, the Qinhai Nationalities Press (mtsho sngon mi rigs dpe mdzod khang) published the two
volumes of the biography (rnam thar) in 1985, followed by the two volumes of the mgur 'bum in 1988. In
2002, Shabkar's 4th incarnation published ten volumes of a new edition of the Works, due to be completed,
in 2003, with two volumes of liturgical texts.
The Shechen edition presented in dpe cha format was prepared at Shechen Monastery in Nepal. Except
for the biography and the first volume of the mgur 'bum, for which we have used original xylographic prints,
the texts have been twice entered on computer and then compared in order to eliminate typographic errors.
They were then proof-read by Alak Zenkar Rinpoche (Tudeng Nima) and by Dagpo Tulku Rinpoche (Sonam
Gyaltsen), and, in the case of a few texts (ie, snying rje sprul pa'i leg bam and legs bshad kun bzang mchod
sprin), by Jigme Thekchog.
After consultation with eminent scholars (in particular Jigme Thekchog), regarding the best way to
organize the texts, we have placed the works in the following order: the biographies (rnam thar), the
collected songs (mgur 'bum), the nine sprul pa'i glegs bam, the three chos bshad, the three legs bshad, the
three gdams ngag and the three Ita ba'i mgur gsum, followed by various instructions (khrid vig), liturgical
pieces ('don cha) and the general list of contents (dkar chag).



236
Mathieu Ricard
Chronology
A significant number of Shabkar's principal writings are dated. The mkha'Iding gshog rlabs, possibly his
most celebrated work, is also one of his earliest, composed in 1807 on the Tsonying Island (mtsho snying),
in the Lake Kokonor. It was there also that, in 1808, he wrote the lam rim gsal ba'i sgron me.
After travelling to Central Tibet, Shabkar wrote the chos bshad gzhan phan nyi ma (1811) at Chölung
(chos lung). In 1812, in Tsari (tsa ri), he composed the chos bshad gzhan phan zla ba and gzhan phan nor
bu, as well as the legs bshad kun bzang mchod sprin. The bka'gdams and 'jam dbyangs sprul pa'i glegs bam
were composed at Mt Kailash (1815), and, at nearby Purang (spu rang), the ngo mtshar sprul pa'i glegs bam
in 1817-8. These were followed, in 1819 at Lapchi (la phyi), by the rgyal sras sprul pa'i glegs bam and, in
1825, by the ya mtshan sprul pa'i glegs bam written at Khardo (mkhar do), near Lhasa.
Returning to Amdo, Shabkar committed to writing in 1837 the first part of his autobiography. Most of
his remaining works were written at Yama Tashikhyil (g.ya ma bkra shis 'khyil). These include the gdams
ngag gser gyi ri bo and the o rgyan sprul pa'i glegs bam, around 1845, and the snying rje sprul pa'i glegs
bam in 1846.
Although they are not dated, the rmad byung and dag snang sprul pa'i glegs bam, were also written at
Tashikhyil, and the legs bshad bdud rtsi'i chu rgyun at nearby Drong Lung ('brong lung).
Shabkar's Literary Style
Shabkar's rich and varied style ranks among the clearest and most beautiful in Tibetan literature. The hermit-
poet composed in a lively, often colloquial manner, expressing in colorful detail the truths of the
contemplative life. Frequently adopting the literary style known as sgrung bshad, namely, the weaving
together of scriptural texts with anecdotes taken from everyday life, Shabkar skilfully presents the Buddhist
teachings with great energy and freshness. Despite his amazing erudition, his main interest is not in
theoretical knowledge but in the transmission of the essential teachings in a lively and engaging way.
Whereas he makes free use of quotations from past masters, his own explanations are expressed in a
vigorous, lucid manner without lapsing into pedantry - a style that was to be imitated by a number of other
writers, notably Dza Patrul Rinpoche (dza dpal sprul rin po che - 1808-1887), who contributed to the great
revival of Tibetan Buddhism in the nineteenth-century.
Shabkar's spiritual songs are a good example of his extraordinary talent for reading the outer world as
a guide for the inner life. Lofty white peaks, for example, or immaculate clouds prompt him see his beloved
teachers seated on them, magnificent and radiant. A transparent, luminous sky enhances his realization of
the view of the Great Perfection. The change of seasons and the withering of flowers inspire him with
melancholy and remind him of impermanence and death. The murmur of cascading streams, the whistling
of the wind, and the songs of birds, call to his mind the words of the teachings and his conversations with
his spiritual masters and friends:
Just as silvery mist rises
Into the vast, empty firmament,
Will not the form of the lord my guru
Appear in the immensity of all-pervading space?
Just as gentle rain slowly descends
Within the beautiful arc of a rainbow,
Will not the guru shower down profound teachings
Within a dome of five-colored light?
Just as rainwater remains
Upon the even ground of a broad meadow.
Will not these teachings remain in the mind
Of your faithful and devoted son?



The Writings of Zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol
237
Just as brilliantly colored flowers
Spring up across the lush, soft moorland,
Will not spiritual experiences and realization
Arise in your son's mindstream?
(SH 8, Vol. 4, p. 405)
Some of his verses display astonishing technical virtuosity. For example, he will sometimes construct an
entire poem using a single vowel. For example "u":
khu byug 'du lung sgrub phug gzungs/ /rgyun du sku gsung thugs gsum bkurl Iphul byung thub
gsung du kun sgrubs//zung 'jug sku gsum myur 'grub 'gyurll (SH 8, Vol. 4. p. 434).
or "e":
bshes gnyen legs bsten bde chen 'dren//theg chen sems bskyed bde gshegs brnyes/ Idge byed khe
che bde legs 'phell /skye med de shes bde ster nges// (ibid. p. 435).
On other occasions, all the words will be marked with ya btags:
rgyal mkhyen phyogs brgyas phyag byas skyob//skyabs rgyal mkhyen rgyas phyag brkyangs kyis/
rgyal spyod skyong phyin phys skyid myong //skyid myong bya byed rgya bsked gyis (ibid. p.
436)
or ra btags:
'brel 'brel spro brod 'gro 'dren sras/ Ispro brod 'gro 'dren sras 'brel 'grogs/ Iphrad phrad srog
'phrog 'gran bral dgra/ srog 'phrog 'gran bral dgrar skrag bros/ (ibid. p. 436).
He even composed a poem consisting entirely of palindromes (verses that can be read forward or backward)
(ibid. p. 438)!
Shabkar has often been compared with Milarepa not only for his way of life and his spiritual
accomplishments, but also for his amazing ability to improvise songs on the spare of the moment. From
down-to-earth advice on ethics and conduct, or highly ornate poetry sent to spiritual masters and kings, to
songs setting forth the vastness of the rdzogs chen view, each song and poem has a particular flavor. In
whatever style he chooses to adopt, Shabkar displays an effortless mastery of the art of Tibetan composition.
The Writings
We have ascribed reference numbers (SH) to each of the works described below.
VOLUME 1
THE AUTOBIOGRAPHIES (rang mam)
SH 1: rnam thar stod cha. Vol. 1 (Ka): 1-970. Autobiography Part 1 (thereafter referred to as NAM):
snyigs dus 'gro ba yongs kyi skyabs mgon zhabs dkar rdo rje 'chang chen po'i rnam par thar pa rgyas par
bshad pa skal bzang gdul bya thar 'dod rnams kyi re ba skong ba'i yid bzhin gyi nor bu bsam 'phel dbang
gi rgyal po [The King of Wish-Granting Jewels).
This volume was also published at Dolanji, by Tsering Wangyal, 1975; as Vols. 1 and 2 of the
incomplete edition of the Collected Works of Zhabs dkar Ishogs drug rang grol: Paro: Lama Ngodrup and
Sherap Drimey, 1980 (thereafter referred to as CWP, for "Collected Works, Paro Edition"). Also Xining:
Qinghai Nationalities Press (mtsho sngon mi rigs dpe mdzod khang, thereafter referred to as QH) 1985:
1-1097, and finally the 2002 edition of the same mtsho sngon mi rigs dpe mdzod khang: 1-1119.
VOLUME 2
SH 2: rnam thar smad cha. Vol. 2 (kha): 1-690. Autobiography Part II. 'gro mgon zhabs dkar ba'i sku
tshe'i smad kyi rnam thar thog mtha'i bar du dge ba yid bzhin nor bu dgos 'dod kun 'byung. Completed by
a posthumous section written by spyang lung sprul sku khyah brdal klong yangs, Second part of volume Ka
of TK edition. Published as Vol. 3 of CWP. Also QH, 1986: 1-645 and QH, 2002: 1-644.



238
Mathieu Ricard
The contents and genesis of the two autobiographical volumes and of the early autobiography" have
been discussed in the Translator's Introduction (thereafter referred to as TI) to the Life of Shabkar.
Part I, composed in 1935, covers Shabkar's life until the age of fifty-six, and Part II, from the age of
fifty-six to seventy. The last section of Part II, written by Kyapdal Longyang (khyab brdal klong yangs),
details some facts, and describes certain miraculous events, not described in the autobiographies. It also
relates the last moments of Shabkar's life.
• SH 3: gsang ba'i rnam thar. Vol. 2 (kha): 691-762. The esoteric biography. rje btsun zhabs dkar rdo rje
'chang chen po'i gsang ba'i rtogs brjod mandarava'i phreng ba de kho na nyid snang ba 'phag ma'i zhal
lung. QH, 2002, Vol. 2: 645-700. (Original manuscript in dbu med, 21 folios, preserved at TK).
The origin of this esoteric biography is rather unusual. Four years after Shabkar's death in 1855, his
close disciple Kunzang Nyendrak (kun bzang snyan grags), who possessed the siddhi of clairvoyance,
visited Yama Tashikhyil. He was there request by Sangye Rinchen (see above) to write the secret biography
of Shabkar by means of pra, a method of divination using a mirror
Kunzang Nyendrak gladly complied with this request and, in 1856, committed to writing all that he had
seen. The result is a unique secret biography describing the visions and meditative experiences enjoyed by
Shabkar throughout his life.
OTHER BIOGRAPHIES (rnam thar)
• SH 4: grub pa'i dbang phyug dam pa dpal chen nam mkha' jigs med mchog gi mnam par thar pa snying
por dril ba bskal bzang thar pa 'khrid pa'i ded dpon. Vol. 2 (kha): 763-868. A biography of Changlung
Namkha Jigme (spyang lung nam mkha' 'jigs med, 1769-1833), one of Shabkar's spiritual friends, written
at TK. According to oral sources in Rebkong, this biography was written based on notes made by Shabkar's
disciple Nyang Tshampa Lobsang Tenpa'i Nyima (nyang mtshams pa blo bzang bstan pa'i nyi ma,
1811-1861).
SH 5: bka'drin mnyam med rtsa ba'i bla ma bstan 'dzin nyi ma rin po che'i rnam thar las, sku tshe'i stod
kyi mdzad pa cung zad tshigs su bcad pa. Vol. 2 (kha): 869-878. An account in verse of the early life of
Tendzin Nyima (bstan'dzin nyi ma) from Gomar (sgo dmar), also known as Lobsang Ozer (blo bzang 'od
zer), an accomplished hermit and one of Shabkar's teachers, whom he met on mtsho snying island.
Composed on the island, in 1809.
SH 6: grub dbang padma rang grol rin po che i sku tshe'i stod kyi rnam par thar pa rin chen 'phreng ba'i
smad cha rin chen phreng mdzes. Vol. 2 (kha): 879-912. The second part of the biography of Drubwang
Pema Rangdrol (grub dbang pad ma rang grol), supplementing the master's own autobiography (the short
title of which is pad ma rang grol rnam thar rin chen 'phreng ba. This first part existed until recently in the
Rebkong area, but so far has not been located). Written at the hermitage of Kheche Dekyi Nyamga Ling (khe
che bde skyid nyams dga gling).
• SH 7: bla ma skal Idan bde bar gshegs pa'i rnam par thar pa las, sku tshe tha ma'i mam thar yi ge nyung
ngu'i lam nas ston pa mi rtag 'chi ba ston pa'i slob dpon. Vol. 2 (kha): 913-929. A short account of the death
of Kalden Rangdrol (skal Idan rang grol), one of Shabkar's closest disciples, also known as Lhundrup
Rigdzin (Thun grub rig 'dzin, 1779-1828), who drowned just after discovering a place where the river Machu
(rma chu) could be forded, thus saving a caravan of hundreds of people from famine. Written at TK.
VOLUMES 3-5
COLLECTED SONGS (mgur 'bum)
SH 8: bya btang tshogs drug rang grol gyis rang dang skal Idan gdul bya la mgrin pa gdams pa'i dang
mdzod nas glu dbyangs dga'ston 'gyed pa rnams. Published in three parts: stod cha, Vol. 3 (kha): 1-760,
bar cha, Vol. 4 (nga): 1-607, and smad cha, Vol. 5 (Ca): 1-402. These are volumes Kha and Ga of the TK
edition. The first part (stod cha) of the mgur 'bum was published earlier as Vol. 4 of CWP: 1-760. Both parts
were published in Amdo as QH Vol. 1 (stod cha), 1987: 1-846, Vol.2 (smad cha), 1988: 1-872, and again in
the QH 2002 edition Vol. 3: 1-815 and Vol. 4: 1-738.



The Writings of Zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol
239
Early one morning at Amnye Machen (a myes rma chen) (see NAM, SH 1, fol. 276). Shabkar had a
vision of a king who told him, "It is wonderful that you adhere to the life-style of our holy predecessors,
singing songs of the sacred teachings. I name you the Bard of the Land of Snows. It is most kind of you to
leave thousands of songs as the heritage of Tibet. They will bring immense benefit to faithful disciples."
The collections of songs are also a mine of information both about Shabkar himself and also his
disciples. Several smaller collections (see SH-MAN 2-7), at the end of this catalogue) were gathered at every
sacred place where Shabkar spent a significant amount of time: Lake Kokonor, Tsa ri, Mount Kailash,
Lapchi etc. Later, many of the songs were incorporated in the two autobiographies (see TI), and there were
still enough written songs left over to fill two large volumes.
MISCELLANEOUS SONGS, PIECES OF SPIRITUAL ADVICE AND LETTERS
• SH 9: springs vig ka la ping ka'i sgra dbyangs. Vol. 5 (Ca): 290-294. Spiritual advice sent by Shabkar from
TK to his disciples in Central Tibet.
SH 10: nyams mgur khu byug sngon mo'i skad snyan. Vol. 5 (Ca): 294-296. A joyful spiritual song,
composed in TK
• SH 11: 'dun ma legs pa'i mgur dbyangs gdangs snyan pi wang gling bu. Vol. 5 (Ca): 296-298. A song in
which Shabkar recollects major aspects of his life, written at TK.
• SH 12: dam chos gser 'od dam pa'i rnga sgra. Vol. 5 (Ca): 298-300. A collection of a dozen major
quotations of the Buddha and a few important teachers, gathered at TK by Shabkar as a source of inspiration.
SH 13: rgyal ba yah sras la phul ba'i zhu shog rab dkar gos bzang. Vol. 5 (Ca): 300-304. A letter offered
to the Dalai Lama, followed by one offered of the Panchen Lama, beginning with the words nges 'byung
byang sems...
SH 14: skyo mgur pi wang rgyud mang. Vol. 5 (Ca): 304-307. A melancholic spiritual advice, evoking
impermanence and the need to dedicate oneself to spiritual practice, sent by Shabkar's to his disciple in
central and western Tibet.
SH 15: man ngag gser gyi thur ma. Vol. 5 (Ca): 307-311. A short spiritual advice.
SH 16: zhal gdams dang mgur sna tshogs. Vol. 5 (Ca): 311-389. Various pieces of advice and spiritual
songs.
SH 17: springs yig kun dga'i dpal ster ngo mtshar dpyid kyi rgyal mo'i glu dbyangs. Vol. 5 (Ca): 403-410.
Letter of advice to disciples and patrons in the central provinces, sent from Chusang (chu bzang) monastery
in Amdo, some time after 1837
SH 18: springs yig rnar snyan yid 'bab dri za'i bu mo'i glu dbyangs. Vol. 5 (Ca): 411-418. Letter of advice
to disciples and patrons living in the region of Ngari Korsum (mnga' ri skor gsum), sent from Chusang
monastery in Amdo.
SH 19: snying gtam dbyangs can pi wang. Vol. 5 (Ca): 418-419. Letter of advice sent to hermits of central
and western Tibet.
SH 20: springs yig bde skyid nyi ma rang 'char. Vol. 5 (Ca): 419-425. Advice in reply to letters from
disciples in central and western Tibet, in which Shabkar explains why he could not come again to see them
and encouraging them to persevere in their practice. Sent from TK.
• SH 21: dbus gtsang la springs yig nyi ma'i 'od zer. Vol. 5 (Ca): 425-433. A similar advice, sent from TK
when Shabkar was 66 years old.
• SH 22: mnga'ris la springs yig zla ba'i 'od zer. Vol. 5 (Ca): 433-441. Message sent to disciples in central
Tibet. Shabkar tells them that he continues to live in solitude at Drong Lung (brong lung) hermitage, and
explains that he is too old to visit the provinces of U and Tsang again. He tells his disciples not to be sad but
to pray to the Guru and endeavor in their spiritual practice.
SH 23: rong mtshams la springs yig nor buli 'od zer. Vol. 5 (Ca): 441-448. Similar message sent from TK
SH 24: sems la gang shar yi ger bkod pa. Vol. 5 (Ca): 448-452. Letter sent to central Tibet from TK, with
gifts, blessed substances and books.
• SH 25: lo rgyus gsal ba'i sgron me. Vol. 5 (Ca): 452-455. Reply to letters from central Tibet.



240
Mathieu Ricard
• SH 26: mi rtag sgyu ma'i chos bshad. Vol. 5 (Ca): 455-459. Letter enjoining his disciples to remember the
impermanent and illusory nature of this world and meditate on the guru's body, speech, and mind. Written
at TK
• SH 27 to 33 are letters sent by Shabkar to Central Tibet (chab shog skor: dbus gtsang phyogs su bskur ba'i
zhu yig sna tshogs) Vol. 5: 459-472. These include:
SH 27: Letter of spiritual advice to Jinpa Norbu (sbyin pa nor bu) beginning with the words Namo guru ji
Ita ji snyed.
SH 28: Letter of advice to Lama Gangriwa (bla ma gangs ri ba) beginning with the words btsun pa'i ljon
shing rtsa ba rab tu brtan...
• SH 29: Letter of advice to Lama Yeshe Wangchuk (bla ma ye shes dbang phyug) beginning with the words
bla ma mchog gsum mgo yi zhwa bzhin bkur...
SH 30: Letter offered to the abbot of Rina (risna) monastery beginning with the words nges 'byung byang
sems yang dag lta ba yi...
SH 31: Letter sent to Khardo Tulku (mkhar rdo sprul sku) beginning with the words zla med thub bstan
dar zhing rgyas pa dang...
SH 32: Letter sent to the young Chaksam Tulku (lcags zam sprul sku) beginning with the words thub bstan
padma'i ishal rnams legs skyong shing.
SH 33: Letter offered to the son of Chogyal Lha Gyari (chos rgyal lha rgya ri) beginning with the words
ris med mdo sngags bstan pa'i nyin byed mchog.
• SH 34: springs yig pi wang rgyud mang. Vol. 5 (Ca): 473-484. A letter describing Shabkar's restoration,
in 1824, of the stupa of Chung Riwoche (cung ri po che), first constructed by Thangtong Gyalpo (thang
stong rgyal po).
SH 35: spring yig snyan pa'i ba dan dkar po. Vol. 5 (Ca): 484-488. Letter sent by Shabkar from TK,
encouraging devotees to support the monastic renunciates with alms.
SH 36: 'phrin yig gdung ba kun sel. Letter of advice. Not found.
SH 37: spring yig bkra shis dpal 'bar. Letter of advice. Not found.
SH 38: bka'shog bkra shis gzhi 'dzin. Letter. Not found.
SH 39: bca'yig rin chen them skas. Rules. Not found
• SH 40: sngags mang gi bca' yig chos kyi sgo 'byed. Vol. 5 (Ca): 488-521. Recalling the history of the
Dzogchen tradition of the Nyingma lineage. Written at TK for the mantrika community of the Rebkong
district
SH 41: bca' yig chos kyi sgo 'hyed. Vol. 5 (Ca): 521-524. Advice to the mantrika community of Zhowong
(zho bong).
SH 42: bca' yig drang srong bden tshig. Rules of the monastic hermitage of Yama Tashikhyil (g.ya ma bra
shis 'khyil). Not found.
• SH 43: snying gtam rin chen phreng ba. Vol. 5 (Ca): 525-527. Advice to the people of Banag Khasum (rba
nag kha gsum).
• SH 44: zhal gdams, spiritual advice beginning with the words skyon gyis ma gos bla mar gsol ba 'debs.
Vol. 5 (Ca): 528.
• SH 45: zhal gdams, spiritual advice beginning with the words dpal Idan bla ma'i zhabs. Vol. 5 (Ca): 528-
530. Written at TK
• SH 46: drin can A ma'i phyi ma'i lam yig. Vol. 5 (Ca): 531-544. (SH 46 to 48) A guide written by Shabkar
after the death of his mother, to lead her on the path of her next life.
• SH 47: A ma dran pa'i mgur. Vol. 5 (Ca): 544-550. Narration, songs and teachings related to the death of
Shabkar's mother, which were later interspersed in the rnam thar. Includes a song beginning with rje bla ma
sangs rgyas...: 547-550.
• SH 48: ma vi drin bsab. Vol. 5 (Ca): 550-555. Remembering and repaying one's mother's kindness
Written by Shabkar on the occasion of his mother's death



The Writings of Zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol
241
MAIN TEACHINGS AND SPIRITUAL INSTRUCTIONS
The English equivalent of the titles, given in square brackets, are those used in the translation of The Life
of Shabkar.
THE NINE EMANATED SCRIPTURES (sprul pa'i glegs bam dgu)
The expression sprul pa'i glegs ham appears in the titles of nine of Shabkar's major works. In NAM (chap.
11. fol. 262b), he explains, "I called these teachings 'emanated' to indicate their authenticity. They are as
though emanated from earlier scriptures, just as one butter-lamp is lit from another." This series of emanated
scriptures succeeds in conveying the flavor and the essential teachings of the various traditions of
Tibetan Buddhism.
VOLUME 6
• SH 49: ngo mtshar sprul pa'i glegs bam [The Marvelous Emanated Scriptures). Vol. 6 (Cha): 1-283.TK
edition, 173 fols. Also manuscript in dbu med, 109 fols. CWP, 1985. QH, Vol 5: 1-234. Composed at the
monastery of Shephel Ling (bshad 'phel gling) in Purang (spu rang), during the winter of 1817-18, this text
became very popular in central Tibet. Shabkar said of it that it is based on the teachings and stories found
in the discourses of the Buddha and in various writings of the sages of India and Tibet." After an elaborate
praise of the Twelve Deeds of the Buddha, it recounts thirty-four former existences of Shakyamuni during
which he generated the wish to attain enlightenment for the sake of all beings and endured immense hardship
simply to receive a few words of teachings.
With the help of didactic stories, the second section stresses the importance of reflecting on
impermanence and death and on the law of karma. The third and fourth parts explain how lay people are to
live in harmony with the Dharma.
SH 50: bka' gdams sprul pa'i glegs bam (The Emanated Scriptures of the Kadampas). Vol. 6 (Cha): 285-
740. Part of vol. Ga of TK edition, 233 fols. Also, manuscript in dbu med of 171 fols., CWP, 1983. QH, Vol.
6: 219-599. Composed at Mount Kailash around 1815, this work was, on Shabkar's own account, intended
to explain the Kadampa "graded path" in simple terms easily accessible to ordinary people. The text is
typical of Shabkar's colorful style. Beginning with renunciation and culminating in the six paramitas, it
abounds in stories and anecdotes illustrating the practices for individuals with limited, medium, and superior
faculties. It may be regarded as a lively, expanded version of the lam rim gsal ba'i sgron me, which Shabkar
composed in 1808.
VOLUME 7
SH 51: rgyal sras sprul pa'i glegs bam [The Emanated Scriptures of the Bodhisattva). Volume 7 (Ja): 1-
330. TK edition, 181 fols. QH, Vol. 5: 235-509. This volume derives its name from the life and teachings of
the great bodhisattva Gyalse Ngulshu Thogme (rgyal sras dngul chu thogs med, 1295-1369), an earlier
incarnation of Shabkar (see TI p.26). It is a detailed explanation of the celebrated blo sbyong don bdun ma
according to Ngulchu Thogme's tradition.
Following an exhaustive description of the lineage of the blo sbyong, there is a thorough explanation
of the "seven-point mind training" (blo sbyong don bdun ma), studded with anecdotes recounted in the
sgrung bshad narrative style. In the section on absolute bodhicitta, the author gives an in depth introduction
to the nature of the mind (sems kyi ngo sprod) enriched with many quotes. This text was composed at
Milarepa's cave Dudul Phuk (bdud 'dul phug) in Lapchi (la phyi) in 1819, at the request of skal ldan rang
grol and many others, following an oral teachings that Shabkar gave to a few hundred disciples,
SH 52: snying rje sprul pa'i glegs bam (The Emanated Scriptures of Compassion). Vol. 7 (Ja): 331-468.
(Part of vol. Cha of TK edition, 61 fols.). QH, Vol. 6: 600-713. This is Shabkar's last major work together
with the second part of his autobiography). Composed at TK around 1846 (see SH 2, QH, 1986, p. 363). It
opens with a beautiful hymn in praise of compassion, illustrated with quotations that Shabkar had collected
throughout his life. The work continues with two sections in which he again condemns uncompromisingly



242
De
Mathieu Ricard
the consumption of meat by Buddhist practitioners. For those on the Mahayana path, he says, it is
unacceptable to eat meat at the cost of endless suffering for animals. He quotes from the Mahaparinirvana
Sutra, in which the Buddha said, "The eating of meat annihilates the seed of compassion," and extensively
from the sixth chapter of the Lankavatara Sutra, which is entirely devoted to the condemnation of meat-
eating: "If, bereft of compassion and wisdom, you eat meat, you have turned your back on liberation. [..).
Meat is the food of ferocious beasts."
It is here and in the legs bshad hdud rtsi'i chu rgyun (SH 65) that Shabkar delivers the most sweeping
indictment of meat-eating to be found in Tibetan literature. It was particularly relevant at a time when the
prediction the Buddha made in the Lankavatara Sutra had already become a reality: "In the future, meat-
eaters, speaking out of ignorance, will say that the Buddha permitted the eating of meat, and that he taught
that there was no sin in doing so."
SH 53: ya mtshan sprul pa'i glegs bam (The Amazing Emanated Scriptures]. Vol. 7 (Ja): 469-642. TK
edition in 76 fols. Also manuscript in dbu can, 88 fols. Darjeeling: Lama Dawa and Chopal Lama, 1984.
QH, Vol. 5: 510-653. Composed at Khardo Samten Ling (mkhar do bsam gtan gling), near Lhasa, in 1825,
this treatise encourages the practitioner to consider the problems created by craving for the five pleasures of
the senses, particularly the attachment to food, clothing, and sex. It tells of the need to rid oneself of the
preoccupations of this life and to endeavor in spiritual practice in solitude; and it describes the joy that such
renunciation brings.
VOLUME 8
SH 54: rmad byung sprul pa'i glegs bam [The Wondrous Emanated Scriptures). Vol. 8 (Nya): 1-256. Part
of vol. Cha of TK edition, 112 fols. Also, manuscript in dbu can, 119 fols., Darjeeling: Lama Dawa and
Chopal Lama, 1984. QH, Vol. 7: 1-214. At the request of the incarnation of Tsodu Khen Rinpoche (tsho'du'i
mkhan rin po che) (the latter was Shabkar's own father) and others, this text was composed at TK after
Shabkar had returned from central Tibet. It opens with a powerful admonition against eating meat, one of
the author's favorite topics, quoting at length from several Mahayana sutras, especially the Lankavatara
Sutra (often said to be "the quintessence of the Buddha's words"), in which the Buddha says: "Those who
practice loving-kindness should consider all sentient beings as their own children; therefore, they must give
up eating meat." Contrary to common belief, not only the sutras but also the tantras condemn meat-eating.
The thugs rje chen po 'khor ba dong sprug gyi rgyud, for instance, says that the result of eating meat is
rebirth in the hell-realm for an entire kalpa, Shabkar cites the example of many saints who denounced meat-
eating, including Mila Repa (mi la ras pa) who said: "Having slaughtered innocent animals, one eats their
flesh and get drunk. All the conditions come together for rebirth in the hell realms."
The second section of the text depicts the negative effects of drinking. It quotes the Buddha who said:
"whoever drinks a drop of alcohol is not my disciple." The third section discusses sex, presenting it as a
compulsive craving that leads to all kinds of negative conduct. The fourth section depicts the dreadful
karmic consequences of killing any living being.
• SH 55: 'jam dbyangs sprul pa'i glegs ham (The Emanated Scriptures of Manjushri). Vol. 8 (Nya): 257-
519. Part of Vol. Nga of TK edition, 144 fols. Also manuscript in dbu can, 109 fols., published as Vol. 5 of
CWP, 1984. QH, Vol. 6: 1-218. Composed near Milarepa's Miracle Cave (rdzu 'phrul phug) at Mount
Kailash around 1815, this compendium of spiritual instructions is written in the form of questions and
answers between Shabkar and his disciples. It presents the essence of the lam rim, blo sbyong, mahamudra,
rdzogs chen, and doha traditions. In twenty-two pieces of advice, the author elucidates the essentials of
spiritual practice: the need to renounce the world, to rely on a spiritual master, and to unite meditation on
emptiness with compassion. It explains how to meditate, how to apply the insights thus gained in daily life,
and how to mingle one's mind with the guru's mind, liberating thoughts as they arise. Shabkar's style is crisp
and effective, as if he had intended to define each step of the contemplative life in the most brief, yet
complete and inspiring way for practitioners.



The Writings of Zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol
243
VOLUME 9
SH 56: dag snang sprul pa'i glegs bam (The Emanated Scriptures of Pure Vision). Vol 9 (Ta): 1-306. Part
of vol. Tha of TK xylograph, 135 fols. Published as vol. 5 of CWP, 1984. QH, Vol. 8: 427-669. Composed
at Tashikhyil, this text stands somewhat apart from Shabkar's other works. In many of his writings, he
emphasizes the safe approach of the Mind Training (blo sbyong), entailing renunciation from worldly
pleasures, for this approach is suited to most practitioners. In this text, however, Shabkar describes the
methods that utilize sense-pleasures and bliss as catalysts for spiritual progress. He clearly delineates
the conditions that must be fulfilled by the exceptional person able to implement such practices in an
appropriate manner.
Shabkar composed this text in response to a request for a teaching that would inspire pure vision toward
the authentic practitioners of the Vajrayana. In the colophon, he mentions that he first conceived the wish to
write such a text when, in the course of his travels, he saw that many people thoughtlessly criticized
Vajrayana practitioners for not renouncing meat, alcohol, and sex. In his introduction he states: "Although
many individuals in this age appear to be merely indulging their worldly desires, one does not have the
capacity to judge them, so it is best to train oneself in the practice of in pure vision."
Drawing on many texts, he defends the Nyingma school against its detractors, warning that it is a
serious fault to disparage an authentic tradition out of prejudice and ignorance. He also demonstrates how
all views and traditions are non-contradictory and lead to the same goal. After giving the reasons why the
Vajrayana must be kept secret, he concludes, "one must cultivate pure perception of the actions of
Bodhisattvas and great siddhas. On the other hand, immature disciples should not thoughtlessly try to imitate
them." The dag snang sprul pa'i glegs bam ends with two small texts on thabs lam.
• SH 57: rdzogs rim 'od gsal mngon du byed pa'i thabs bde ba chen po bskyed tshul 'dod yon lha mo'i dga'
ston. Vol 9 (Ta): 291-295, QH, Vol. 8: 670-673.
SH 58: yes shes kyi phyag rgya ma la brten nas bde stong gi ye shes hskyed tshul dpyid kyi rgyal mo'i glu
dbyangs: Vol 9 (Ta): 296-306, QH, Vol. 8: 674-683. Although these two last sections were carved at TK and
have been included in the present edition, as well as in QH, they are considered to be sealed with secrecy
(bka'rgya ma).
• SH 59: bstan 'gro yongs la phan pa'i O rgyan sprul pa'i glegs bam [The Emanated Scriptures of Orgyen).
Vol 9 (Ta): 307-579. Vol Om of TK xylograph in 106 fols. Also published at Dolanji: Tsering Wangyal, 1975.
QH, Vol. 7: 215-441. QH, Vol. 7: 215-440. Once, in his old age, Shabkar experienced a vision of Guru
Padmasambhava. In the course of the vision he said to Guru Rinpoche, "I have prayed to you all my life, yet
until now I have never been blessed by a vision of you." "Don't you remember," Guru Rinpoche replied,
*The vision you had on the Island of Tsonying? That was me." He thus indicated that it was he who had
appeared to him in the form of Tsongkhapa. Following this vision, and at the request of the Tulku of Khenpo
Shiwa Tso (mkhan po zhi ba mtsho) and others, Shabkar wrote this treatise at TK, around 1845 (see SH 2.
QH, 1986, p.349).
The first section describes how our universe - with its countless realms, Buddhas, and sentient beings
- appeared within the immutable expanse of primordial emptiness. The author then explains how various
pure and impure perceptions, samsara and nirvana, came about through the process of dependent arising. In
infinite Buddhafields and in every atom of the universe, infinite Buddhas display infinite forms to meet the
aspirations and capacities of beings, and to free them from ignorance and suffering. Shabkar then goes on
to show how, thanks to pure perception; the entire phenomenal world can be regarded as the manifestation
of Guru Padmasambhava.
The purpose of the second section is to demonstrate the authenticity of the tantras and gter ma of the
Nyingma tradition. Shabkar points out that gter ma are found in all lineages of Indian and Tibetan
Buddhism, and not only in the Nyingma lineage. He then quotes masters from various schools who
emphasize that the gter ma tradition is particularly appropriate for our times
Citing the second Dalai Lama and masters from all schools, the third section describes how Atisha and
Tsongkhapa were both emanations of Padmasambhava. Shabkar lays special emphasis on the relationship



244
Mathieu Ricard
between the Nyingma master Lhodrak Drupchen Lekyi Dorje (tho brag grub chen las kyi rdo rje, 1326-
1401) and Je Tsongkhapa. The fourth section is a final encouragement to extricate oneself from the bonds
of samsara and speedily to attain Buddhahood.
THE THREE DHARMA DISCOURSES (chos bshad gsum)
VOLUME 10
SH 60: chos bshad gzhan phan nyi ma [The Beneficial Sun). Vol. 10 (Tha): 1-308, composed in 1811, at
Cholung (chos lung) near Lhasa. Part of volume Ja of TK edition, 122 fols. Also manuscript in dbu med, 166
fols, CWP, 1983. QH, Vol. 6: 441-696. "Scholars," Shabkar declares, "can delight the learned with a stream
of profound and elegant teachings, but these are not much help to ordinary, uneducated people. The latter
sometimes come away from long teaching sessions with nothing to keep in mind and nothing to pass on to
others. They can only say, 'The master taught a lot, but we haven't a clue of what he was talking about. We
would like to practice, but we don't know where to start."
It was with such people mind that Shabkar composed this text. “My disciples," he said, "persistently
requested these teachings, but I had no books from which to draw stories and quotations. So like a generous
person turning his bag inside out and tipping out its contents onto a cloth spread upon the ground, I wrote
down everything that came into my mind without holding anything back and called it The Beneficial Sun."
The structure of this text is typical of several of Shabkar's other writings that focus on Mahayana
training. Beginning with the basic karmic law of cause and effect, he explains how negative thoughts and
actions result in suffering and positive ones bring happiness. He also explains the value of human existence.
To misuse or squander this life is like filling a jewelled golden vase with filth. Through vividly depicting the
sufferings of animals, he stresses the evils of hunting and fishing, and of butchering animals for their meat.
Having emphasized the essential role of loving-kindness, compassion, and Bodhicitta as the very essence of
the Mahayana path, Shabkar concludes by explaining the importance of dedicating the merits of virtuous
actions to the benefit of others.
• SH 61: chos bshad gzhan phan zla ba [The Beneficial Moon) composed at Tsari in 1812. Vol 10 (Tha):
309-651. TK edition, 171 fols. Also manuscript in dbu chen of 178 fols, kept in Kyermi, Humla, Nepal.
NGMPP, reel no. E 2723/11 to 2724/1. QH, Vol. 8: 1-284. Shabkar wrote the chos bshad gzhan phan zla ha
at Tsari in 1812, for the benefit of disciples living in solitary retreat in the mountains. The text is illustrated
with wonderful quotations from the saints of the four main lineages of Tibetan Buddhism, chiefly belonging
to the Kagyu school. Of all Shabkar's writings, this text gives the most powerful incentive to give up the
ordinary affairs of this world. It presents non-attachment and renunciation as the keys to spiritual progress
and happiness. If no inner transformation results from one's study, meditation and action, it is because of
one's strong desire for the pleasures of this life.
Shabkar exhorts his disciples to go to secluded mountain retreats and not to postpone their spiritual
practice. A novice who practices in busy places stacks all the odds against success on the spiritual path. By
contrast, solitude enables even vulnerable beginners to progress without hindrance. Although the welfare of
beings should be their main motivation, immature practitioners should not be too quick to help or teach
others, before they have developed a stable realization.
VOLUME 11
• SH 62: chos bshad gzhan phan nor bu [The Beneficial Jewel) Vol. 11 (Da): 1-631. TK edition, 247 fols.
QH, Vol. 9: 1-529. At the request of Kunzang Rangdrol, one of his close disciples, Shabkar wrote this text
4. On the relation between lho brag grub chen and song kha pa, see Ehrhard, Franz-Karl "The 'Vision' of Dzogs-
chen: A text and its histories." In Proceedings of the 5th Conference of the International Association for Tibetan
Studies. Naritasan: 1989, as well as Appendix 5 of The Life of Shabkar and The Collected Works (gsung 'bum) of
Iho brag grub chen nam mkha'rgyal mtshan. Thimphu: Kunzang Topgyel. 1985.



The Writings of Zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol
245
in a small hermitage near the Varahi Temple at Tsari in 1812. Its purpose is to enhance pure perception
toward the various aspects and levels of the Buddha's teachings and to those who hold these teachings.
Shabkar explains here at great length how all these philosophical views and spiritual practices are in truth
non-contradictory. He also advice cultivating pure vision toward non-buddhist traditions. With an abundance
of reasoning, quotes and stories he shows how the various misconceptions held by uneducated people
regarding each of the four main schools of Tibetan Buddhism are unfounded.
THE THREE EXCELLENT DISCOURSES (legs bshad gsum)
VOLUME 12
SH 63: legs hshad kun bzang mchod sprin (The Cloud Like Offering of Samantabhadra). Vol. 12 (Na): 1-
314 composed at Tsari in 1812. TK edition, 134 fols. QH, Vol. 10: 103-364. This four-part text was
composed at Tsari for Shabkar's close disciple Kalden Rangdrol (skal Idan rang grol, 1779-1828) and
others, who requested a text that would inspire faith, respect, and pure perception towards the various levels
of the Buddhist teachings and those who practice them. Shabkar explains the need for diversity in the
Buddha's teachings, tailored as they are to the varying capacity of beings. Since they are all aids in the
progress towards enlightenment, and antidotes to suffering, the teachings are non-contradictory. Shabkar
quotes at length the conversations of Drom Tönpa ('brom ston pa rgyal ba'i 'byung gnas, 1004-1064) with
his teacher Atisha (jo bo rje a ti sha, 982-1054) about the relationships between the various yanas and the
need to cultivate a pure perception of all Buddhist schools.
The essence of all the teachings is to master one's mind and dispel ego clinging (bdag 'dzin); one
therefore needs to develop a correct view (Ita ba). In this context, Shabkar offers an in-depth teaching on
the nature of the mind and a thorough investigation of the notion of ego. He concludes by stressing the
essential need to cultivate bodhicitta and pure vision (dag snang) towards all beings and phenomena.
• SH 64: legs bshad nyi ma rang shar (The Self-Arising Sun) Vol. 12 (Na): 315-574. Part of vol Tha of TK
xylograph, 116 fols. QH, Vol. 10:365-583. Shabkar examines the controversy surrounding the so-called hwa
shan view. He describes the protagonists of the debate that took place at Samye between the proponents of
the gradual approach to enlightenment (rim skyes pa), represented by Shantarakshita's disciple
Vikramashila, and the adepts of "sudden" realization (cig char ba), advocated by the Chinese monk Hwa
shan Mahayana. He reminds us of the views of Sakya Pandita and Tsongkhapa, who accused the
practitioners of mahamudra and rdzogs chen of falling into the hwa shan view. Shabkar also presents the
refutations of these opinions by several Nyingma and Kagyu scholars, especially Kunkhyen Pema Karpo
(kun mkhyen padma dkar po, 1527-1592).
With characteristic diplomacy, Shabkar begins by paying homage to all the protagonists in the
controversy. He also points out that there were numerous philosophical schools among Chinese Buddhists,
each of them represented by learned and accomplished masters. The meditation practice that aims to bar all
conceptual thoughts from the mind is only one among the three main hwa shan views.
In defence of the Nyingma tradition, Shabkar then dismisses Thuken Chökyi Nyima's (thu'u hkvan blo
bzang chos kyi nyi ma, 1737-1802) astonishing claim that King Lang Darma (glang dur ma), who almost
wiped out Buddhism in Tibet, was an emanation of Chenrezi, the Buddha of compassion, because he cleared
away "impure doctrines" (meaning the Nyingma tradition). Shabkar then gives a detailed explanation of the
difference between the state of having no thoughts and the state of going beyond thoughts. And he shows
the difference between the Dzogchen teachings, which he describes as the apex of the Vajrayana, and the
hwa shan views which are based on eighty specific sutras.
• SH 65: legs shad bdud rtsi'i chu rgyun [The Stream of Ambrosia). Vol. 12 (Na): 575-614. QH, Vol. 9: 549-
580. This text is entirely devoted to an explanation of the negativity involved in the consumption of meat.
It was composed in Drong Lung ('brong lung), in Amdo. It has been translated into English by
the Padmakara Translation Group, and published, with an introduction in Food for Heroes, Boston,
Shambhala, 2003



246
Mathieu Ricard
VOLUME 13
THE THREE SPIRITUAL INSTRUCTIONS (gdams ngag gsum)
SH 66: mi shes mun pa mthug po sel ba'i lam rim gsal ba'i sgron me (The Torch That Illuminates the
Graded Path). Vol. 13 (Pa): 1-169. TK xylograph in 61 fols. Also CWP, 1983. QH, Vol. 8: 285-426.
This short text, written at Tsonying Island, shows that the equivalence between dependent origination
(rten 'byung) and emptiness is the ultimate view of the Madhyamaka Prasangika. This understanding,
however, does not lead us to neglect the laws of karma, but rather to the realization that emptiness manifests
as the law of cause and effect.
In 1808, on Tsonying Island, Shabkar experienced a magnificent dream (see NAM chap. 6, fol. 117) in
which he climbed a long crystal staircase to the top of a jewel mountain, upon which he met a lama of
resplendent dignity. "One never tired of looking at him; the mere sight of his face put an end to the mind'
delusion." The lama in question was Guru Padmasambhava appearing in the form of Tsongkhapa. He was
teaching the lam rim bsdus don to a retinue of disciples. At the end of the teaching, he gave the book to
Shabkar. Inspired by the account of this dream, some disciples requested Shabkar to compose a teaching in
verse on the graded path. He therefore composed the lam rim gsal ba'i sgron me, intending thereby to
present an intermediate version of the lam rim teachings of Je Tsongkhapa (rje tsong kha pa blo bzang grags
pa, 1357-1419), shorter than the lam rim chen mo, yet more detailed than the lam rim bsdus don. Composed
in verses of fifteen syllables each, this treatise is perhaps the most formal of Shabkar's works.
• SH 67: rang gzhan thams cad 'shengs pa'i gdams ngag gser gyi ri bo. [The Mountain of Gold), Vol. 13
(Pa): 171-292. TK xylograph in 47 fols., CPW, 1983. QH, Vol. 10: 1-102. This instruction, composed at TK
around 1845, refers to various activities related to the preparation for spiritual practice. It emphasizes the
benefit of cleaning temples, of displaying sacred images, and of arranging offerings properly and beautifully.
These are the various methods that allow one to perfect the accumulation of wisdom and merit. The text then
describes the virtuous practices to be performed between meditation sessions and finally, the way in which
merit is to be dedicated with prayers of aspiration. It ends with three additional texts:
• SH 68: mchod pa 'bul ba'i skabs su ji liar bslab pa'i rim pa. Vol. 13 (Pa): 275-287. QH, Vol. 10: 86-96.
The benefits of making mandala and other offerings to the Buddha and Bodhisattvas dwelling in
countless Buddhafields.
SH 69: mchod pa'i smon lam. Vol. 13 (Pa): 287-9. QH, Vol. 10: 97-98. Prayer to dedicate the merit of
making offerings.
• SH 70: mchod pa'i smon lam zhing khams sgo 'byed. Vol. 13 (Pa): 289-292. QH, Vol. 10: 99-102. Prayer
to dedicate the merit of performing offerings, and pray for rebirth in a Buddhafield.
• SH 71: legs bshad gser gvi thur ma [The Golden Scalpel - do you mean scalpel]. Vol. 13 (Pa): 293-317.
TK xylograph, 12 fols. Xylograph print from lha sa, carved in 1842 or 1902, 27 fols. QH, Vol. 9: 529-548.
This is one of Shabkar's most famous short Dzogchen instructions, which helps one to recognize the
fundamental nature of the mind. Composed at TK.
THE THREE SONGS ON THE VIEW (Ita ba'i mgur gsum)
SH 72: 'od gsal rdzogs pa chen po'i khregs chod Ita ba'i glu dbyangs sa lam ma lus myur du bgrod pa'i
rtsal ldan mkha'Iding gshog rlabs [The Flight of the Garuda). Vol. 13 (Pa): 319-384. QH: Vol. 9: 549-580.
TK xylograph in 61 fols. Together with:
• SH 73: 'od gsal rdzogs pa chen po'i thun grub thod rgal gyi glu dbyangs ting 'dzin sgo 'phar brgya phrag
cig char 'byed pa'i Ide'u mig, Vol. 13 (Pa): 385-449. QH: Vol. 9: 581-635.
SH 74: thod rgal gyi gnad kyi zhal shes mgur dbyangs bdud rtsi'i bum bzang (fols. 55-61). Vol. 13 (Pa):
451-470. QH,: 636-701. Part of Vol. Ta of TK edition. Composed at mtsho snying Island around 1807. Wood
blocks have also been carved at Khampagar, Tashijong near Kangra, in India (75 fols).
These three form a trilogy and are usually published together. SH 72 has been translated twice into English
as The Flight of the Garuda, by Erik Schmidt, Pema Kunzang, Kathmandu, Rangjung Yeshe, 1984; and by
Keith Dowman, Boston, Wisdom, 1993. There is also a partial translation in German with an analysis of the text



The Writings of Zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol
247
and its background by Franz-Karl Ehrhard, Flugelschlage des Garuda. Literar-und ideengeschichtliche
Bermerkungen zu einer Liedersammlung des rDzogs-chen, Stuttgart, Franz Steiner Verlag, 1990.
Composed around 1807, when he was twenty-six years old, this is perhaps Shabkar's most famous
work. In twenty-three short songs addressed to his disciples, he introduces, with striking beauty and clarity,
the view, meditation and practice of the khregs chod section of Dzogchen practice, which leads directly to
realization of the ultimate nature of the mind.
The second part (SH 73), in eighteen songs, presents the fundamentals of thod rgal, the ultimate
practice of Dzogchen. The third part (SH74), in three songs, elucidates actual instructions for that visionary
practice, based on oral tradition. Because of their highly esoteric nature these two last parts were not
included in the English translations.
MISCELLANEOUS WRITINGS (gsung sna tshogs)
• SH 75: sems khrid yid bzhin nor bu. Vol. 13 (Pa): 471-479. Teaching and meditation on the nature of the mind.
SH 76: sems khrid snying gi nor bu. Vol. 13 (Pa): 479-482. An instruction encouraging the reader to watch
the nature of the mind.
• SH 77: sems kyi ngo sprod go sla 'khyer bde. Introduction to the nature of mind. Not found.
• SH 78: gdams pa gcig shes kun grol. Vol. 13 (Pa): 482-486. How to meditate on the nature of the mind
and deal with discursive thoughts. Written at the Kuntuzangpo forest hermitage.
SH 79: rdzogs chen kun gyi yang bcud nyams len lam khyer gdams pa. Vol. 13 (Pa): 486-489. How to
maintain the practice of rdzogs chen in all circumstances.
SH 80: rdzogs pa chen po'i phan yon. Benefits of the Great Perfection. Not found.
• SH 81: tshig gsum gnad rdegs kyi 'grel ba. Mentioned in dpal rgyal mkhar article (see note 3), but not
found and unknown to present scholars.
• SH 82: zab mo dbu ma'i Ita ba ngo mtshar rmad byung. Vol. 13 (Pa): 491-507. Composed at Yama
Tashikhyil. Shabkar this text explains how emptiness and dependent origination are two ways of speaking
of the same thing. It is because phenomena are devoid of real existence that they can arise uninterruptedly
according to the ineluctable laws of cause and effect.
• SH 83: zab mo lia ba'i gdams pa. Instruction on the profound view. Not found.
SH 84: rgyal ba blo bzang dgyes pa'i glu dbyangs. Vol. 13 (Pa): 509-531. A collection of verses extracted from
the beginning and end of each chapter of the 'jam dpal zhal lung written by the fifth Dalai Lama (an epitome of
the lam rim chen mo of Je Tsongkhapa. Written down by Shabkar at Zalung (zwa lung) in central Tibet.
SH 85: chos nyan Ishul. Advice on how to listen to the teachings. Not found.
SH 86: blo sbyong 'dod 'byung nor bu. Manuscript in dbu med, 13 fols. Instructions on Mind Training.
Not found.
• SH 87: bsam gtan chos drug. On the six yogas. Not found.
• SH 88: sprul bsgyur ngo mtshar sgyu ma'i Itad mo'i dga' ston. On the practice of meditative
transformations (sprul bsgyur). Not found.
• SH 89: dad pa'i A long 'dren pa'i mdo rgyud lung gi lcags kyu. Not found,
• SH 90: lung bstan dag snang chos kyi sgo 'byed. Predictions. Not found.
SH 91: gsang sngags snga 'gyur la rtsod pa spongs ba sgol ngan dngos po 'joms pa'i rtsod lan rdo rje
pha lam. Refutation of critics against the rnying ma tradition. Not found.
• SH 92: rdor sems sgom bzlas byin rlabs bla ma'i rnal 'byor chos bshad dang bcas pa. Vol. 13 (Pa): 533-
550. Instructions for the purification practice based on Vajrasattva, and for the Guru Yoga.
• SH 93: bla ma'i rnal 'byor bsgoms pa'i phan yon. Vol. 13 (Pa): 551-567. A collection of citations extolling
the benefits of the Guru Yoga practice. Written at Mt. Kailash.
• SH 94: bkra shis 'khyil ba'i gnas bstod kun dga'i dpal ster. Manuscript in dbu can, 4 fols. Praise to the
sacred place, Yama Tashikhyil. Not found.
SH 95: mchod rten chen po bya rung kha shor nyams gso gnang ba'i dkar chag thar lam dkar po (The
White Path of Liberation], A description of the offering of a layer of gold to the Great Stupa of Bodhnath,
Kathmandu, Nepal in 1821. Quoted in NAM chap. 13, fol 373. Not found.



248
Mathieu Ricard
SH 96: gcun ri bo che'l bkra shi sgo mang mchod rten chen po'i nyams gso gnang ba'i dkar chag gsal
ba'i me long. [The Bright Mirror Record). The list and description of the restoration work of the bkra shis
sgo mang stupa at Chung Riwoche, in To, composed in 1824 (see NAM chap. 14, fol. 397). Not found.
• SH 97: rten bzhengs byas pa'i phan yon. Vol. 13 (Pa): 569. The benefit or erecting sacred objects.
• SH 98: srog shing 'bri tshul mdor bsdus. Vol. 13 (Pa): 569-570. Mantras and prayers to be written upon
the "life-tree" inserted in statues and stupas
• SH 99: rten bshad kun 'dus nor bu. Vol. 13 (Pa): 570-574. A list of relics of all kinds used by Shabkar to
prepare pills to be placed inside statues and other sacred objects.
• SH 100: dug don lung dang rig pa'i mda' mo. Vol. 13 (Pa): 575-592. Xylograph print in 12 fols., also
NGMPP, reel no. L 26318. This short text explains the harmful effects of smoking tobacco. Tibetan
Buddhism in general, and the Nyingma school in particular, is one of the only religious traditions that
considers the smoking of tobacco to be a major source of obstacles on the spiritual practice, written at Drak-
kar Trel Dzong (brag dkar sprel rdzong) in 1809 or 1810. Scholars have pointed out that the original
manuscript used to prepare this text seems to have been flawed and we hope, eventually, to locate a more
correct version.
• SH 101: grangs 'dren me tog phreng ba blo gsal gzhon nu'i mgul rgyan. Vol. 14 (Pha): 593-685. A
collection of enumerations of Buddhist concepts and categories.
• SH 102: lung 'dren rin chen gter mdzod [A Jewel Treasury of Quotes), manuscript in dbu med kept at TK,
133 fols (missing fols. 124 to 132). This manuscript, an extensive collection of quotes from the sutras,
tantras and writings of past masters, which Shabkar collected throughout his life has been recently lost in
a mdo.
VOLUME 14
LITURGICAL PIECES ('don cha sna tshogs)
• SH 103: ston pa thugs rje can gyi mdzad pa bcu gnyis dang mthun pa'i ram thar gsol 'debs nor bu'l
phreng ba. Vol. 14 (Pha): 1-5. Prayer to Lord Buddha Shakyamuni, recalling his Twelve Deeds.
SH 104: ston pa'i yon tan rjes su dran ishul chos kyi sgo 'byed. (9 fols) Praise to the Buddha's qualities.
Not found.
• SH 105: bod kyi rgyal po pandita grub chen rag rim isa zhig mgo smos nas bod du sngon byon dam pa
rams la gsol 'debs. Vol. 14 (Pha): 7-18. A devotional prayer to the great religious kings of Tibet and the
accomplished masters of the various spiritual lineages.
• SH 106: bla ma'i gsol 'debs byin rlabs gter mdzod. Vol. 14 (Pha): 19-24. A poetic prayer to the guru,
written at Tsonying island.
SH 107: bla ma'i mtshan don dang 'brel ba'i gsol 'debs. Vol. 14 (Pha): 25-26. Devotional prayer invoking
the names of various teachers of Shabkar's lineage.
• SH 108: grub ba'i dbang phyug dpal chen nam mkha' 'jigs med rin po che i skyes phreng gsol 'debs rin
chen gser gyi phreng ba. Vol. 14 (Pha): 27-31. A prayer to the previous and future incarnations of Changlung
Namkha Jigme (spyang lung nam mkha' jigs med - 1769-1833), who had close spiritual links with Shabkar
(see his biography in SH 4). Written at TK.
• SH 109: zhabs dkar ba'i skye rabs nyung 'dus. Vol. 14 (Pha): 33-34. A short prayer to Shabkar's past and
future incarnations.
SH 110: bla ma'i rnam thar gsol 'debs dad pa'i sgo 'byed. Vol. 14 (Pha): 35-40. A devotional prayer
evoking Shabkar's life. Written at TK.
SH 111: bla ma'i ram thar gsol 'debs snying rje'i sgo 'byed. Vol. 14 (Pha): 41-46. A devotional prayer
focused on Shabkar's compassionate deeds, such as saving the lives of animals, appealing to hunters to stop
killing animals and to give up eating meat etc.
SH 112: bla ma'i gsol 'debs byin rlabs myur 'jug. Vol. 14 (Pha): 47-49. A devotional prayer to Shabkar,
written at Mt. Kailash
• SH 113: bla ma rgyang 'bod. Vol. 14 (Pha): 51. A prayer calling the Guru from afar.



The Writings of Zhabs dkar tshoga drug rang grol
249
• SH 114: na mo gu ru, dal 'byor myed dka chi ha myur du 'ong (sngon 'gro nyung bsdus). Vol. 14 (Pha):
53-54. A concise text for performing the "preliminary practices" (sngon 'gro nyung 'dus).
SH 115: A concise meditation on the various steps of spiritual practice, from sngon 'gro to rdzogs rim,
beginning with the words na mo gu ru manjugosha ya, chos sku kun bzang longs sku rdo rje 'chang. Vol. 14
(Pha): 55-56.
[Together, the following texts, SH 116-119, written at Mt. Kailash, form a sngon 'gro practice. The guru
yoga is sometime found on its own).
SH 116: skyabs sems gsol 'debs dad pa'i 'jug ngogs. Vol. 14 (Pha): 57. Refuge and Bodhicitta.
SH 117: rdor sems bsgom bzlas sdig sgrib 'khru ba'i chu rgyun. Vol. 14 (Pha): 57. Meditation and
recitation on Vajrasattva
SH 118: mandal zhing khams sgo 'byed. Vol. 14 (Pha): 58. Mandala offering,
• SH 119: sgyu lus 'od skur grol ha'i bla ma'i mal 'hyor Vol. 14 (Pha): 59-60. Guru Yoga,
• SH 120: A short guru yoga (bla ma'i rnal 'byor) focused upon the master as embodying the Three Roots,
beginning with the words gar bzhugs zhing nas bla ma tshur byon. Vol. 14 (Pha): 61-62.
SH 121: gsol 'debs byin rlabs myur 'jug ma dang bla ma'i rnal 'byor. Vol. 14 (Pha): 63-76. A guru yoga
focused on Shabkar. It incorporates the prayer SH 112, written earlier. Composed at Drong Lung ('brong
lung) in Amdo.
• SH 122: jam dbyangs dkar po la brten pa'i bla ma'i rnal 'byor. Guru yoga focused on White Manjushri.
Not found
SH 123: rje btsun 'jam dbyangs dmar ser la bsten pa'i bla ma'i rnal 'byor. Guru yoga focused on the Red-
Orange Manjushri. Vol. 14 (Pha): 77-82.
SH 124: rdo rje rnal 'byor ma la brten pa'i bla ma'i mal 'byor. Guru yoga focused on Vajra Yogini. Not found
SH 125: Orgyan bla ma'i rnal 'byor. Vol. 14 (Pha): 83-89. A Guru yoga focused on Guru Padmasambhava.
SH 126: Beginning with the words mdun gyi nam mkhar 'ja''od gur khang klong, a guru yoga focused on
the trikaya (Shakyamuni, Vajradhara and Samantabhadra), with Guru Padmasambhava and Je Tsongkhapa.
Written at Tsonying Island. Vol. 14 (Pha): 91-94.
• SH 127: rje btsun mi la la bsten pa'i byin rlabs myur 'jug bla ma'i rnal 'byor. Vol. 14 (Pha): 95-100. Guru
yoga focused on Milarepa.
• SH 128: myur lam bla ma'i rnal 'byor. Vol. 14 (Pha): 101-107. A guru yoga applicable to all teachers,
composed at Mt. Kailash.
• SH 129: bla ma'i rnal 'hyor dngos grub kun rtsol. Guru Yoga, 4 fols. Not found.
SH 130: byang sgra mi snyan gyi tshe sgrub kyi bla ma brgyud pa'i gsol 'debs. Vol. 14 (Pha): 109-111.
Devotional prayer to the lineage masters of the "Long-life Practice of Uttarakuru".
• SH 131: byang sgra mi snyan gyi tshe sgrub kyi rgyun khyer 'chi med tshe yi yang snying. Vol. 14 (Pha):
113-123. Daily recitation for the "Long-life Practice of Uttarakuru". Written at Chusang (chu bzang)
in Amdo.
• SH 132: byang sgra mi snyan gyi tshe sgrub mdor bsdus. Vol. 14 (Pha): 125-126. Short sadhana of the
"Long-life Practice of Uttarakuru"
SH 133: bkra shis 'chi med dpal ster. Vol. 14 (Pha): 127-128. Prayer for attracting good fortune, to
conclude a long-life sadhana. Written at 'brong lung in a mdo.
• SH 134: spyan ras gzigs kyi bsgom bzlas zhal mthong gsung thos ma bzhugs so. Vol. 14 (Pha): 129-130.
Sadhana practice based on a vision of Avalokiteshvara. Written at Mt. Kailash.
SH 135: spyan ras gzigs kyi bsgom bzlas phan bde'i 'byung gnas. Vol. 14 (Pha): 131-132. Meditation and
recitation on Avalokiteshvara.
• SH 136: smyung gnas cho ga bde gshegs lam bzang. Vol. 14 (Pha): 133-168. Fasting practice based on the
eleven-faced Avalokiteshvara. Written at Mt. Kailash.
SH 137: smyung gnas cho ga thar pa'i them skas. Vol. 14 (Pha): 169-178. Concise fasting practice. Written
at Mt. Kailash.
SH 138: rdor sems sgom bzlas sdig bsgrib kun byang. Meditation and recitation on Vajrasattva. Not found.



250
Mathieu Ricard
SH 139: rdo rje sems dpa'i khrus kyi cho ga bdud rtsi'i bum bzang. Vol. 14 (Pha): 179-186. Cleansing
ritual based on Vajrasattva. (From a flawed manuscript, a proper edition should be searched for.)
SH 140: gcod dnigs bdag 'dzin gcod pa'i stwa re. Vol. 14 (Pha): 187-188. Visualization for the bcod
practice. Written at Tsari.
SH 141: zab lam gcod kyi dmigs rim. Vol. 14 (Pha): 189-194. Visualization for the bcod practice. Written
at Mt. Kailash
• SH 142: zab lam gcod kyi ngag 'don bdag 'dzin good kyi stwa re. Vol. 14 (Pha): 195-202. NGMPP, reel
no. L 309/5. Visualization for the bcod practice.
SH 143: gcod dmigs bdag 'dzin rfsad gcod. Vol. 14 (Pha): 203-208. A liturgical text for the practice of gcod.
SH 144: 'pho ba spyi gtsug 'ja' gur ma. Vol. 14 (Pha): 209-210. Short practice of transference to
Amitabha's Buddhafield.
SH 145: tshogs mchod 'dod dgu'i char 'bebs. Vol. 14 (Pha): 211-217. A liturgical text for offering a
ganachakra to the deities of the three roots. Written at Mt. Kailash.
• SH 146: tshogs mchod kun bzang mchod sprin. Vol. 14 (Pha): 217-227. An expanded liturgical text for
offering a ganachakra to the deities of the three roots. Written at 'byams pa gling.
SH 147: rab gnas bsdus pa. Manuscript in dbu can, 2 fols, preserved at Serang Gonpa, Nepal. NGMPP,
reel no. L 342/3. Ritual for the consecration of sacred objects. Could not be included in this edition.
SH 148: bsang mchod mdor bsdus. Vol. 14 (Pha): 229-230. Short ritual for offering fragrant smoke
SH 149: mnol bsangs mdor bsdus. Vol. 14 (Pha): 231-232. Short purifying offering of fragrant smoke.
• SH 150: g.yang 'gug dul ba kun sel. Vol. 14 (Pha): 233-237. Invocation for attracting prosperity and well-
being. Written at TK.
• SH 151: dzam nag gi mngon rtogs 'dod dgu'i char 'bebs. Vol. 14 (Pha): 239-244. Visualization and
recitation focused on black Jambhala for increasing abundance.
• SH 152: Short invocation to Jambhala beginning with the words bla ma yid bzhin nor bu. Vol. 14 (Pha): 245.
• SH 153: gtor bsngo mdor bsdus. Vol. 14 (Pha): 247-252. Short gtor ma offering
SH 154: gtor ma brgya risa bsdus pa, chu sbyin, klu gtor mdor bsdus, gsur bsngo nyung bsdus. Vol. 14
(Pha): 253-260. Texts for the "hundred gtor ma offering", water gtor ma offering, offering to the Nagas, and
burnt offering. Written at Lapchi.
• SH 155: ja mchod dod dgu'i char 'bebs. Tea offering. Not found.
• SH 156: mkha' 'gro mched Inga'i gser skyems dngos grub char 'bebs. Vol. 14 (Pha): 261-262. Libation-
offering to the "five sisters of longevity," tshe ring mched Inga.
• SH 157: shar thams cad mkhyen pa blo bzang chos grags rgya musho'i yang sprul myur 'byon. Vol. 14
(Pha): 263-264. Supplication for the swift rebirth of the abbot of Rongpo Gonchen (rong po dgon chen)
in Rebkong.
SH 158: Supplication for the swift rebirth of Serkhang Dorje Changsang Tendzin Gyatso (gser khang rdo
rje 'chang bzang bstan'dzin rgya mtsho - 1780-ca. 1848), beginning with the words rgyal bstan 'dzin mkhan
yongs kyi ges4g gi ryan. Vol. 14 (Pha): 264,
SH 159: Supplication for the swift rebirth of Shabkar's chief disciple Drubwang Pema Rangdrol (grub
dbang padma rang grol - dies in 1837), beginning with the words risa brgyud bla ma yid dam zhi khro dang.
Vol. 14 (Pha): 265.
SH 160: Supplication for the swift rebirth of Drubwang Dzogchen Rinpoche (grub dbang rdzogs chen rin
po che, probably chos dbyings stobs ldan rdo rje), who died in 1848, beginning with the words phan bde'i
'byung gnas mdo rgyud rin po che. Vol. 14 (Pha): 266.
SH 161: Supplication for the swift rebirth of Jigme Sangpo (jigs med bzang po) abbot of Shelgon (shel
dgon) monastery near Rebkong, beginning with the words "jigs bral phyogs las rnam rgyal yongs dzin rje.
Vol. 14 (Pha): 266-267.
• SH 162: sprul sku myur byon spyi 'gro. Vol. 14 (Pha): 267-268. General Supplication for the swift rebirth
of a deceased master.



The Writings of Zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol
251
SH 163: chos spyod smon lam rim pa bde skyid nyi ma rang 'char Vol. 14 (Pha): 269-284. An elaborate
prayer of dedication and aspirations, to conclude any spiritual practice and accumulation of merit.
Composed at a hermitage near Amnye Machen.
• SH 164: Beginning with the words bla ma rdo rje sems dpar gus phyag Tshal, a prayer to be reborn in the
Abhirati (mngon dga'), the Buddhafield of Vajrasattva. Written at Tsari. Vol. 14 (Pha): 285-288.
SH 165: smon lam sangs rgyas zhing khams grangs med kyi sgo rnams 'byed pa'i Ide mig, Vol. 14 (Pha):
289-296. Aspiration to be reborn in the eastern Buddhafield of Abhirati (mngon par dga' ba), written
following a dream in which Shabkar's guru urged him to pray to be reborn in this Buddhafield.
• SH 166: rigs Inga'i zhing sbyong smon lam. Vol. 14 (Pha): 297-310. Prayer to be reborn in the
Buddhafields of the Buddhas of the Five Families. Incorporates part of SH 165. Written at la plyi.
SH 167: bsngo ba gser gyi phreng ba. A prayer used for dedicating virtuous deeds. (See NAM chap. 12,
fol. 314). Incomplete manuscript. Not included in this edition.
• SH 168: smon lam rin chen gser gyi phreng ba. Vol. 14 (Pha): 311-314. Dedication prayer written on
Tsonying island.
SH 169: smon lam bde skyid kun 'byung. Aspiration prayer. Not found.
SH 170: kha ton byas pa'i mjug tu 'don rgyu'i smon lam. Vol. 14 (Pha): 315-316. Verses to dedicate the
merit after performing one's daily prayers.
• SH 171: rgyal khams hde zhing skyid pa'i gsol 'debs. Vol. 14 (Pha): 316. Prayer for peace.
SH 172: Aspiration prayer (smon lam) beginning with the words bslu med dkon mchog gsum gyi byin rlabs
kys... Vol. 14 (Pha): 317
• SH 173: mar me'i smon lam. Vol. 14 (Pha): 318. Prayer to accompany lamp offerings. Composed at
Mt. Kailash.
SH 174: mar me smon lam 'dod 'byung nor bu 'od'bar (The Blazing Jewel that Grants all Wishes). 10
fols. A prayer to accompany lamp-offerings. Mentioned in NAM chap. 9, fol 2006, this piece was probably
composed in Lhasa around 1810-11. Not found.
• SH 175: Dedication prayer beginning with the words bla ma dkon mchog gsum la phyag 'shal lo. Vol. 14
(Pha): 319-320.
• SH 176: ci bsam 'grub pa'i smon lam. Vol. 14 (Pha): 321. Prayer
SH 177: phun sum Ishogs pa'l bkra shis. Vol. 14 (Pha): 323-324. Wishes for auspiciousness
• SH 178: bkra shis rin chen phreng ba. Vol. 14 (Pha): 325-332. Wishes for the fulfillment of all
spiritual aspirations.
SH 179: skar chag gsal ba'i me long las skyabs mgon zhabs dkar pa'i gsung 'bum gyi tho vig. Vol. 14
(Pha): 333-345. This is the most complete list of Shabkar's writings known. It does not provide a structured
arrangement of the masters' works, but is a detailed inventory of the books preserved at Yama Tashikhyil (it
even describes the fabric in which the volumes were wrapped). This list proved extremely helpful in the
search for, and compilation of, Shabkar's miscellaneous writings.
• SH 180: 'gro bali mgon po zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol gi gsung 'bum gyi bzhugs byang mani phreng
ba, Vol. 14 (Pha): 347-366. The list of contents of the che chen edition of Shabkar's Collected Writings, and
of the supplementary texts (rgyab chos) from the rta phag yid bzhin nor bu cycle of teachings rediscovered
by gter chen kun bzang bde chen rgyal po.
MISCELLANEOUS MANUSCRIPTS
Apart from a few pages, these manuscripts do not constitute separate works by Shabkar, and are found in
other works. Nevertheless, it seemed of interest to list them, as they provide some insights on the genesis of
some of Shabkar's works.
• SH-MAN 1: rnam thar dngos (Early autobiography]. Manuscript in dhu med, 50 fols, kept at Khakar
Gonpa, Tarap Dolpo, Nepal. (Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project, thereafter referred to as
NGMPP, reel No. L 408/10). Not included in this edition, as it has been later incorporated in the final
redaction of Shabkar's autobiography.



252
Mathieu Ricard
• SH-MAN 2: Autobiographical song, beginning with the verse pha yul rgya mtsho nang nas thon/ mi med
ri khrod mkha'la 'phags/tshogs drug ran grol nyi gzhon gyil ram thar dri med od zer. Manuscript in dbu
med, 3 fols, kept at Khakar Gonpa, Tarap Dolpo, Nepal. NGMPP, reel no. L 408/9.
.SH-MAN 3: bya btang tshogs drug rang grol gyis phyogs med ri khrod 'grims pa'i tshe rang gzhan chos
la bskul ba'i phyir glu dbyangs blangs tshul rim pa. [The Tsari Songs). Manuscript in dbu med, 44 fols.
NGMPP, reel no. L 315/9. (Folio 17 missing). The contents and arrangement of this du med manuscript
preserved in Trulshik Rinpoche's library are almost identical to the section on Tsari Songs in SH 8, but it
contains a few short extra pieces.
•SH-MAN 4: bya btang tshogs drug rang grol gyis sems nyid me long gsal la mgur dbyangs gzugs brnyan
gang shar rnams yi ge'i gzugs su bris pa. [Songs Arisen in the Mirror of Mind). Manuscript in dbu med from
Dolpo Tarap in Nepal, 76 fols. This manuscript contains seventy-nine songs. Thirteen were incorporated at
the beginning of the chap. 11 of NAM, sixty-two which were incorporated in SH 8, and four that are found
in neither of these two texts. This collection was gathered by Orgyen Tendzin (o rgyan bstan 'dzin), a
disciple of Jinpa Norbu (sbyin pa nor bu) active in Dolpo Tarap.
• SH-MAN 5: rje btsun tshogs drug rang grol gyi mam thar bsdus pa dang gangs rir mdzad pa'i mgur ma
[Short biography and the Kailash Songs). Manuscript in dbu med from Dolpo Tarap, 43 fols. This second
manuscript from Dolpo contains forty-one songs and pieces of advice. Out of these ten were incorporated
in chap. 11 of NAM, twenty-one in SH 8 and ten are not found elsewhere.
•SH-MAN 6: bya btang tshogs drug rang grol gyis phyogs med rgyal khams 'grim pa'i tshe dad can snang
'gyur ba'i thabs mgur dbyangs pi wang rgyud mangs (The Many-Stringed Lute). Manuscript in dbu med
from Dolpo Tarap, 117 fols. Of the sixty pieces contained in this collection, fifteen have been incorporated
in SH 8, eight in chap. 11 of NAM, twenty in chap. 12, and four in chap. 13. The few pieces original to this
collection include a devotional prayer addressed to Jinpa Norbu (sbyin pa nor bu) composed by Shabkar at
Lapchi, as well as prayers to the lineage of the Mahamudra teachings, to the lineage of Nagarjuna's zab mo
Ita brgyud, and to the rdzogs chen mkha''gro snying thig lineage. There is also a prayer for Shabkar's long
life offered by the government of Tibet (dga' ldan pho brang). The collection ends with an appeal to
benefactors to support the restoration of the Tashi Gomang (bkra shis sgo mang) stupa at Chung Riwoche
(gcung ri bo che), which must have been written in 1824 (see NAM chap. 14). For a discussion on
the relation between these three collections from Dolpo and the genesis of Shabkar autobiography,
see TI p.23.
• SH-MAN 7: rang gzhan gyi sems la phan pa'i gsung nye mkho kha shas (Pieces of Advice to Self and
Others). Manuscript in dbu med, 202 fols. NGMPP, reel no. L 178/3. The manuscript of this compendium
of Shabkar teachings was lost in the fire that destroyed Thangboche Monastery (Nepal), in 1988.
Fortunately, it has been preserved on microfilm through the efforts of the Nepal German Manuscript
Preservation Project.
RTA PHAG YID BZHIN NOR BU'S CHOS SKOR (rgyab chos)
Texts from the rta phag yid bzhin nor bu cycle revealed by Terchen Kunzang Dechen Gyalpo (gter chen kun
bzang bde chen rgyal po- b. 1736).
These were the basis of Shabkar's main spiritual practice and are still practiced today in Shabkar's and
other lineages. It therefore seemed helpful for their preservation and transmission to include them in the
present edition. Details about Kunzang Dechen Gyalpo, his rediscovered teachings and his lineage are given
in Appendix 4, to The Life of Shabkar, Snow Lion, 2001.
TP I: rta phag vid bzhin nor bu'ilas byang dngos grub rgya mtsho dang zur rgyan 'dod 'byung nor bu
bklag chog tu bkod pa pundarika'i do shal. Vol. 14 (Pha): 367-411. The sadhana of Hayagriva and Vajra
Varahi, with supplementary sections, arranged and written by Kyabje Trulshik Rinpoche ('khrul zhig ngag
dhang chos kvi blo gros, born 1924), who received the transmission of this cycle of teachings from Shugsep
Jetsun (shug gseb rje brsun chos nyid bzang mo - 1852-1953) and offered them to Kyabje Dilgo Khyentse
Rinpoche (dil mgo mkhyen brtse rin po che 'gyur med theg mchog bstan pa'i rgyal mtshan, 1910-1991).



The Writings of Zhabs dkar tshogs drug rang grol
253
• TP 2: yang gsang rta phag yid bzhin nor bu'i dbang chog ye shes bdud risi'i bum bzang. Vol. 14 (Pha):
413-480. Text to bestow the empowerment of the rta phag yid bzhin nor bu, written by Kyabje
Trulshik Rinpoche
• TP 3: yang gsang ra phag gi las byang dngos grub rgya mtsho. Vol. 14 (Pha): 481-508. Sadhana of
Hayagriva and Vajra Varahi, arranged by Gurung Natsok Rangdrol (dgu rong sna tshogs rang grol),
in Amdo.
TP 4: mgon dkar gyi sgrub thabs bla ma mong po'i zhal lung dngos grub rol mtsho. Vol. 14 (Pha): 509-
525. Sadhana of mgon po dkar po, the protector of the rta phag cycle. Written by Gurung Natsok Rangdrol.
• TP 5: yang gsang rta phag yid bzhin nor bu'i skong bshags kyi cho ga padma raga'i phreng ba. Vol. 14
(Pha): 527-553. Liturgy for the confession and repair ritual related to the rta phag sadhana. Written in Amdo
by Gurung Gedun Jigme Namdrol (dgu rong dge 'dun 'jigs med rnam grol).
• TP 6: rta phag yid bzhin nor bu'i bzhi ba'i shyin sreg ye shes me 'od. Vol. 14 (Pha): 555-570. Pacifying
Fire offering related to the rta phag cycle. Written by Nyang Tshampa (nyang mtshams pa blo bzang bstan
pa'i nyi ma, 1811-1861)
• TP 7: yang gsang rta phag bsnyen pa'i kha skong gi sbyin sreg 'khyer bde bkod pa sgrib mum 'joms pa'i
nyi ma. Fire ceremony performed when completing a recitation retreat focused on rtag phag sadhana. Vol.
14 (Pha): 571-573. Written by Gurung Natsok Rangdrol.
• TP 8: yang gsang rta phag las char 'bebs kyi cho ga phan bde'i dpal shyin. Vol. 14 (Pha): 575-596. Ritual
to bring rainfall. Author unknown.
• TP 9: gter gsar rta phag vid bzhin nor bu'i bsnyen yig nyams chung yid kyi mun sel. Vol. 14 (Pha): 597-
609. Manual for the recitation and meditation precious upon the rta phag sadhana. Written by bya bral skal
Idan rig grol. Manuscript from central Tibet.
• TP 10: rta phag yid bzhin nor bu'l skyed rdzogs. Vol. 14 (Pha): 611-613. Instructions on the development
and completion stages of the rta phag practice. Author unknown. Manuscript from central Tibet.
• TP 11: rta phag yid bzhin nor bu las risa lung senge nyams rtogs bde chen 'od 'bar. Vol. 14 (Pha): 615-
624. Instructions on yogic practices. Revealed by Tertön Dechen Gyalpo. Manuscript from central Tibet.
• TP 12: rdzogs pa chen po ma rig mun sel gyi sngon 'gro'i zur rgyan. Vol. 14 (Pha): 627-659. Notes for the
preliminaries practice to the Great Perfection teachings of the rta phag cycle known as ma rig mun sel (TP
13, composed by chos rgyal nga gi dbang po). Author unknown.
• TP 13: gter gsar rdzogs chen gyi khrid rim ma rig mun sel ye shes sgron me. Vol. 14 (Pha): 661-861.
Detailed instructions on the practice of the rtag phag cycle leading to the meditation of the Great Perfection,
written by Shabkar's main teacher, Chogyal Ngakyi Wangpo, Ngawang Dargye (chos rgyal ngag gi dhang
po ngag dbang dar rgyas, 1736-1807). Edition based on a manuscript in Shabkar's handwriting preserved
in Kyabje Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche's library, and on a xylograph from Rebkong,



- A PRELIMINARY NOTE ON THE “RIN.CHEN BZANG.PO TEMPLES"
OF RKAN.BZHI, LADAKH*
Heather Stoddard
(Paris)
This note describes four temples in rkan.bzhi, northern Ladakh, which have received little if any attention
from the Western scholarly world. Three of them are reported by Jamyang Gyaltsen, in The History of
Ladakh Monasteries,' to have been founded by Rin.chen bZang.po (958-1055), while the local monks &
scholars claim that only two date to his time. A preliminary examination of all four, during a three day stay
in the village last summer, reveals that each construction is quite distinct, with only one, La Cu.rtse certainly
going back to the beginning of the Phyi.dar. Another, called here skya.pa's Temple, may be an ancient
foundation, but from the present state of its interior must be described a fine provincial example dating from
the early period of the 'Bri.gung establishment in Western Tibet, ca. 13th-14th century.
While walking in the mountains between Bla.ma g Yung.drung (Lamayuru) and Pho.mkhar rDzong last
summer,' we climbed on the fourth day up from the magnificent arena of sMyu.gu.rtse La.khug (Nyugutse
Lakhug),' over the sMyu.gu.rtse Pass down to Shilakangrong, then up again to the Yogma La (4700 m), and
down along Garlic Valley to camp outside Dumbur, the herding village belonging to the people of rKan.bzhi
(Ganshi), a little further down the valley. We visited the small village temple of Dumbur that had been re-
consecrated by the 'Bri.gung Kyabs.rje, the Seventh Che.tshang Rin.po.che, bsTan-'dzin Kun-bzang 'Phrin-
las Lhun-grub (b. 1946) during his recent tour of the 'Bri.gung monasteries of Ladakh. Both His Holiness,
and the minister of Ladakh, rTogs.ldan Rin.po.che (b. 1938), incarnate lamas of the 'Bri.gung school, are
active in sponsoring the renovation and revitalisation of monasteries and temples in Ladakh.
The following day after a two hour walk westwards, the beautiful site of rKan.bzhi itself appeared at
the junction between four valleys, as its name "Four Flanks" (rKan.bzhi) implies. The multi-ethnic origins
When Ladakh opened up in 1975, I was living for a couple of months in Gene's place in Defence Colony, New
Delhi. We had just arrived from Japan, and Samten was rushing around battling with the Indian administration,
trying to arrange papers for Ama-la to come with us to England. Meanwhile I was heavily pregnant with Ozer, and
getting larger day by day, basking in the gently affluent atmosphere of Gene's very special home, with his ever-
open-door to hungry, dusty, road-weary, budding Tibetologists. In spite of the templation, I was quite unable to take
a plane or bus up to that rocky, mythic land, and it was not until the summer of 2000 that for the first time I
discovered the ancient temples and stone carvings of Mar.yul. In 1975, Gene was already a legendary book
publishing figure amongst the Tibetan refugees, and a dear old friend. During those two months I was able to check
on the legend. Indeed Gene worked a full day at the Library of Congress office in New Delhi, often partying with
various Indian friends in the evening, before retiring to work a full night reading the Tibetan manuscripts that came
flooding into his home day after day. The estimate that he only slept four hours a night was perfectly true! We had
first met, by chance, in Dharamsala - when the Cultural Revolution was in full swing! Gene arrived from out of the
blue in McLeod Ganj one day and invited the few Injies who happened to be around to a memorable 1967 New
Year's party!
1. The History of Ladakh Monasteries (HLM), ed. Jamyang Gyaltsen, published by the All Ladakh Gonpa Society,
Leh, 1995, 681-682.
2. See Tucci, Indo-Tibetica II, Rin.chen bZang.po and the Renaissance of Buddhism in Tibet, around the Millennium,
New Delhi 1988; and Gu.ge Khyi.thang pa Jnana.shris mdzad.pali Loistsha wa Rin.chen bzang po'i rnam.thar
Shel. 'phreng lu.gu rgyud, Karuna Foundation 1996, on the life of the Great Translator
3. Marc François, a specialist of Ladakhi and 'Brigung history was leading the trek. Thanks to him for the adventure,
and for the use of his data base (hereafter MF).
4. The Wylie spelling for place names is used here except where unknown, and then a phonetic rendering is given.



A Preliminary Note on the "Rin.chen bZang.po Temples of Kan.bzhi"
255
of the population of the large village reveal to an astonishing degree the intermingling of populations in this
territory over millennia of commercial exchange, military invasion and religious implantation.
The village is built on two promontories on the south- and north-west "flanks" of the mountains.
Between these, the path rises rapidly to Timthi La; while southwards a gradual rise leads to the rKan.bzhi
La, with just a day's walk over to the large dGe.lugs.pa monastery of Rang.'dum. To the North, the pathway
descends to the main highway between dNgul.'bigs (Mulbek) and Bla.ma g Yung.drung, with Heignas.sku
(or 'E.na.sku) further north. A new motor road is under construction from that juncture, and probably in a
couple of years the people of Kan.bzhi will be within reach of the outside world by jeep.
1. Lha.khang Chung (14th July)
The first temple we visited was Lhakhang Chung, the "Little Temple", built in the south-west quarter below
the oldest part of the village, near Kya.pa's Chapel (see below, 4.). From the dark interior it would appear
to be an ancient establishment, and could at first glance seem to be one of the three mentioned by Jamyang
Gyaltsen. However, according to the 'Bri.gung.pa, this temple was founded only about four hundred years
ago, by a minister of King Seng.ge Gyal.mtshan (1553, r.1569-1623), under whose reign the bka'.brgyud
lineages were reinforced in Ladakh, several decades before the dGe.lugs.pa expansion in the 17th century.
Then it was re-built in the 1880s, several decades after the sacking of the temples of Ladakh by Zorawar
Singh Khaluria (1794-1842), vizier of Kishtwar.
Inside the chapel, there are two main stucco images (dating to the restoration?), of Padmasambhava,
and of the second skyab.mgon Che.tshang Rin.po.che of 'Bri.gung Thel, dKon-mchog 'Phrin-las bZang-po
(1656-1718, r. 1661-1718), to whom in 1710, King Nyi.ma rNam.rgyal (1651, r. 1687-1717) offered fields
near gTing-mo-sgang to compensate for the decline in 'Bri.gung influence, due to the pressure of
dGe.lugs.pa expansion in Western Tibet. The statues are executed in the provincial 'Bri.gung or ba'.brgyud
style found in many monasteries in Ladakh. They also have a Prajnaparamita in 100,000 verses.
The next day an ancient ritual ceremonial dance of the minister", was held by and for the men of
rKan.bzhi, with the women looking on from afar. We met local officials, as well as the school teacher and
artist, Kon.mchog Nor.bu, and were told about the other temples, and went to visit the A.phyi.khang next.
2. A.phyi.khang (15th July)
This second temple sits above the village on the north-west outcrop, and is also associated with the
"Rin.chen bZang.po" group. According to The History of Ladakh Monasteries, in 1553, the Lord of Wa.kha
with three men of Kan.bzhi offered this temple to the "Dharma Lord" Chos.rje 'Dan.mal as his offering
base" (mchod.gzhi). He went there, saw the face of A.phyi, and so had a statue of her made as a "support".
Then the site was recognised as belonging to the tradition of the Lord Protector of 'Bri.gung. Later it appears
to have fallen into ruins, for the History of Ladakh Monasteries says that after some time only the walls were
left standing. Just recently it was rebuilt, thanks to the activity of rTogs.ldan Rin.po.che, and today it
appears as a rather new A.phyi khang (pron. Achi-khang), or Chapel of the Protector of 'Bri.gung, after
whom the famous Alchi (Alci chos.'khor) is perhaps named. Some new stucco statues and a thangka of
A.phyi painted by the artist Kon.mchog Nor.bu are on display.
5. Just as we arrived in Kan.bzhi on the 14.7.2000, news came that two or three monks, including the abbot of
Rang. 'dum had been gunned down the day before by Muslim extremists. A curfew was imposed all round from Leh
to Kargil. A lone German hiker who was passing by was captured, his throat slit and his body thrown in the river.
An emergency meeting was held in Lamayuru the following day, with the two Buddhist ministers of Ladakh,
rTogs.ldan Rin.po.che, and Khrirtse Rin.po.che and other officials of Ladakh.
6. MF
7. HLM, 682.



256
Heather Stoddard
3. La Cu.rtse Temple (16th July) [fig. 1]
The next morning we left early to walk to another "Rin.chen bZang.po" temple, outside the village on the
way up to the rKan.bzhi Pass. The small sgom.grva, or meditation retreat, is called locally La Cu.rtse or
Cu.rtse, and is under the administration of Bla.ma g Yung.drung. Amongst all four temples of Kan.bzhi, it
is this sgom.grva that dates without any doubt to the early period of the "Latter Diffusion" of Buddhism in
Tibet, i.e. between the last quarter of the 10th through to the end of the 19th century. It is the work of highly
skilled Kashmiri artists, and has recently been restored with funds gathered by the local committee, again
probably at the behest of rTogs.ldan Rin.po.che. It certainly deserves to be put on the heritage list of Ladakh,
if it is not there already. Full photo coverage of the wooden carvings on the site has been made by the present
author. The square structure is built against the slope of the mountain, essentially housing a four-pillar
temple (temple interior, approx. 8 x 6.30 x 7 m. H), with retreat quarters on the west side.
Before discussing La Cu.rtse in detail we shall make a short digression to Wan.la and Alci, since the
woodwork in both are useful as sources of comparison. Like La Cu.rtse, Al.ci and Wan.la have early
Kashmiri style doors and architectural features, and (for this very reason?) are attributed by local tradition
to the Great Translator. However, since art historians question the blanket attributions of the "108 Rin.chen
bZang po Temples", the foundation dates of many of these sites are still open to investigation. It is generally
accepted that the group of temples mentioned as belonging to the late 10th century, founded during the reign
of Lha Bla.ma Ye.shes.'od, are authentic. These are Kho.char in sPu.rang, r'Ta.po Cog.la.rgyan in Pi.ti
(Sil.cog), Nyar.ma in Mar,yul, Sha.ling in sPu.rig, and mTho.ling in Gu.ge.
Of the three, the main doorway of Wan.la appears to be the simplest in detail and perhaps the latest),
although it is also the most difficult to read, since during the recent restoration by the Archaeological Survey
of India, the door and veranda with the original Kashmiri style carvings were covered in thick red mud wash
[fig. 2)." The wall paintings in the interior, in the main mandala chapel of the Eleven-headed
Avalokitesvara are of quite a different style, and must date, like the interior of sKya.pa's Temple in Kan.bzhi
(see below n. 4) to ca. 13th century, belonging to the initial period of the 'Brigung bka'.brgyud presence in
Western Tibet. The main Eleven-headed Avalokitesvara, or bCu.gcig.zhal sPyan.ras.gzigs image appears to
be much older than the paintings, in spite of restoration and repainting, and probably, in the view of this
author, goes back to the time of foundation, long before the arrival of the 'Bri.gung.pa.
The main door in Al.ci has also been newly painted in what appear to be chemical colours, thus once
again making the fine Kashmiri carvings less easy to read [fig. 3). They too form a useful comparison with
the main doorway of La Cu.rtse in that the deities are seated in niches in a similar fashion. In Al.ci the design
and layout is simpler and clearer, and the sculptures on the whole are in better condition. In fact, although
all three sites are certainly in "Kashmiri style". they all have quite distinct features, and probably belong to
different workshops and different periods of the early Phyi.dar. However, the scenes in the series of five
8. HLM, 682-3.
9. See Tucci, Indo-Tibetica, New Delhi 1988; D. Klimburg-Salter, Tapo. A Lamp for the Kingdom, Milan 1997;
Luczanits, "Another Rin.chen bzang po Temple?", in East & West 1994, 44/1; 83-98; T. Pritzker, "A Preliminary
Report on Early Cave Paintings of Western Tibet", in Orientations 1996, 27/6, 26-47. For Wan la see HLM, 663-
673.
10. R. Vitali. "Ladakhi temples of the 13th-14th century: Kan-ji lha-khang in sPu-rig and its analogies with Gu-ru lha-
khang". Kailash, 1996, VIII/3-4, 255-272: Nyang.ral Chos. 'byung, Lhasa 1988, 461.
11. Several early stucco figures in Central Asia style have also disappeared from Wan.la, MF.
12. Sec HLM 663-4, for a description of the layout of Wan.la as a mandala: This (Wan.la) temple is quite different from
all others. It is square like a mandala. It has four doors and four rta. 'bab (?). These are beautifully decorated with
precious ornaments, and the artwork is particularly fine. The main support" is a three storey Eleven-headed
Avalokitesvara, on either side are the Eight Close Sons, at the East door is Avalokitesvara Khasapani, and at the
West door is the Lord of Sages. On the first two floors the wall paintings are of mandala of the Four Classes of
Tantra, the Thousand Buddha, and the lineage of lamas of the ba' brgyud pa school."



A Preliminary Note on the "Rin.chen bZang.po Temples of rKan.bzhi"
257
niches at the top of the doorway in La Cu.rtse can be found in Al.ci as well. The analysis of these scenes,
probably from the life of the Buddha, and of the other figures around the La Curtse doorway, will be the
object of another study.
It may be appropriate to mention that in the opinion of this author, the early thirteenth century dating
given by Goepper for the founding of Al.ci," needs reconsidering. The 'Bri.gung lineage upon which his
argument is based certainly dates to the early thirteenth century, since 'Bri.gung Rin.chen.dpal (1143-1217)
and one of his disciples are found at the end of the line. However, since the religious affiliation of the
"Bri.gung bka'.brgyud was and still is predominantly that of the Anuttarayoga-tantra brought into Tibet by
Mar.pa Lotsawa (1012-1096/7) in the mid-11th century, their school follows practices belonging to this class
of Tantra. Thus it is logical that the mandala that adorn their temples are in accordance their practice, as seen
in Wan.la for example, and in the Lhakhang gSo.ma and Lotsawa Lha.khang of Al.ci.
In the earlier Kashmiri-style temples of Al.ci, i.e. the 'Dus.khang and Sum.rtsegs, the onographic
schema and mandala are from the Yoga-tantra class. These must pre-date the arrival of the 'Bri.gung.pa in
Western Tibet, and it is well known that although Rin.chen bzang po "mastered and expounded, in general,
all the basic texts of the Prajnaparamita and Tantra classes, he expounded, in particular, the Yoga-tantra, and
transmitted these teachings to his disciples".14 He too studied the Guhyasamaja at the feet of Naropa, but
nevertheless, for at least one hundred years (ca. 985-1092), the kings of Western Tibet, who were the
benefactors of Rin.chen bZang.po and his school of translators, and who were the main promoters of the
"Latter Diffusion of Buddhism" in Western Tibet, took an expressly anti-Anuttarayoga-tantra stance. They
were most antagonistic to the group of "Mother Tantras" brought in by 'Brog.mi (993-1074), and Mar.pa
Lotsawa (1012-1096/7). Pho.brang Zhi.ba.'od himself became a lotsawa and took over the organising of
religious affairs after Rin.chen bZang.po's passing away. Thus the iconographic schema in the early temples
of Western Tibet reflects their choice, and we are not surprised to find Yoga-Tantra deities such as Sarvavid-
Vairocana dominating the scene.
On the other hand, the 'Bri.gung,pa brought with them their group of Tantras, together with a new style
of painting. This, in sharp contrast to the Kashmiri style, is a provincial version of the "Gya.gar lugs" that
was prevalent all over Central Tibet in the 12th and 13th centuries. It is precisely this style that is found in
the rKan.bzhi temple of the skya.pa family, in the Wan.la Eleven-headed Avalokitesvara Mandala temple:
and in the Lhakhang gSo.ma and Lotsawa Lhakhang of Alci.
The fact that, as Goepper pointed out, the 'Bri.gung lineage in Al.ci ends with 'Jigs.rten sKyobs.pa
Rinchen.dpal (1143-1217), and is in Kashmiri or Kashmiri-influenced Western Tibetan style, suggests that
it may have been done by a local artist at the very beginning of their presence in Western Tibet (end of 12th
century), before their full implantation, i.e. before they brought their own artists with them or trained new
ones in the style they were familiar with. Their own artist-monks may have been easier to obtain and to
recompense. The name Al.ci (pron. Alchi, or Achi) also may originate from the 'Bri.gung period, since the
name of their protector A.phyi (pron. Achi) Chos.kyi sGrol.ma, grand-mother of 'Jigs.rten sKyobs.pa, is so
close to the actual name of the temple. If this is in fact the case, then it should be possible to find an earlier
name for the Al.ci chos.skor. 17
13. See Alchi, by R. Goepper, photography by J. Poncar, Serindia 1997; see below n.25.
14. BA 351.356, Tucci, Indo-Tibetica II, New Delhi 1988, 31.
15. See S. G Karmay, The Arrow and the Spindle, Mandala Book Point, Kathmandu 1998, 3-16, "The Ordinance of
Lha Bla.ma Ye.shes. 'od", dated ca. 985, 17-54, "An Open Letter by Pho.brang Zhi.ba.'od", dated 1092: R. Vitali,
The Kingdoms of Gu.ge Puhrang, Dharamsala 1996, 237-240; A. Heller. "Early Ninth Century Images of
Vairocana from Eastern Tibet". Orientations 1994, 25/6, 74-79, and "The Caves of gNas,mjal chen.mo" in D
Klimburg-Salter (ed.). The Inner Asian International Style 12th-14th centuries, Wien, 133-150.
16. See H. Stoddard, "Early Tibetan Paintings. Sources and Styles", in Archives of Asian Ar. XLIX, 1966, 26-50.
17. Marc François' data-base; and Tashi Rabgyas, History of Ladakh, Leh 1984, 77, gives Alci or A.gcig chos.bskor,
showing that the spelling is not stable.



258
Heather Stoddard
The wood carvings on the main door of La Cu.ftse are of particularly fine quality [figs. 4 & 5), rivalling
those in Alci, yet being executed in a more elaborate style. The recent restoration has been simply done,
using traditional materials, with the wood left untouched. While it varies from a light golden-reddish colour
(doorways) to a dark reddish colour on the inside (pillars and capitals which are specifically described as
juniper) and in protected places, on the outside in the most exposed parts of the temple, the wood is
weathered to a whitish raw crackle. The door frame is rather crooked on the inside, and the sculptures on
the outside extremely worn in parts. However, this door clearly represents the best of the Kashmiri tradition.
The structure follows the typical rectangular Indo-Kashmiri style, with up to three different encased
registers of both bas-relief and deep carving. The lintel has the greatest detail with a double-petal lotus frieze
along the top section, a jewel & kirttimukha (or lion-face?) pattern in the central section, and five scenes,
probably from the life of the Buddha Sakyamuni in the lower register. These are enshrined in architectural
niches, each with different ornamentation and structure. They are of the finest quality and are the best
conserved of all the wood carvings in La Cu.rtse.
New masonry and layers of whitewash must have been added around the Cu.rtse door frame over the
centuries, so now only a single vertical section is visible, with four superimposed niches on either side.
These contain single standing or seated deities each occupying his or her own niche. They are badly worn
by a thousand years of pilgrims' hands rubbing the door as they enter the temple, and are difficult to identify
However, the top right image may be of a Krodha such as Acala, with his left leg extended to the side.
The narrow door-way to the retreat [fig. 6) is in a simpler style though of the same light golden wood,
as are the structures inside. The frieze patterns are of pearl or foliate design, while the lintel has a similar
lotus border and bejewelled kirttimukha band just above the door. The structure above this is rather
complicated. The centre piece appears to be winged, although the "wings" may represent sow's heads
extended on either side. A narrower lintel sits above, with in the middle square section a seated figure that
is somewhat damaged. This may be the bodhisattva Manjusri with his right armed raised. It also may
represent a princely donor figure, since a flat Western Tibetan turban and typical early hairstyle can be
guessed at, with the plaits knotted on either side of the head at shoulder level, as in Ta.po (996), and as in
the donor scene beneath the Five Tathagata at the foot of Shel Fort and Monastery, near Leh (mid-10th
century).20
Inside the retreat there is a comfortable kitchen for practitioners with a cooking range and a proper
chimney built inside the wall to the left of the entrance - a rarity in the Tibetan world! This too is likely to
have been built by the original Kashmiri artists, since there is a shelf with finely carved floral patterns just
to the left side of the chimney, forming part of the whole. A similar chimney may have been built a little
later in the same century in Central Tibet, for it is said about Pha Dam.pa Sangs.rgyas (2-1117), the great
Indian yogin - who travelled up to Tibet from India, Nepal and China three or four times in the 11th and
early 12th century - that when he was in Gyal, 'Phan.yul, serving the monastic community for a long time,
he built a chimney that lit of its own accord"?' i.e. probably meaning that it had a good upward draw! It may
have been similar to this one in La Cu.rtse. A large storeroom or windowless meditation cell is found to the
right of the main door as one enters. A small door with similar carvings leads beyond the kitchen area to a
small space where a wooden almost vertical ladder goes to the upper storey. Turning right one enters a
narrow gallery above the entrance to the main temple, with one of the original pillar-heads still in place. All
the openings in this retreat are small, suggesting the extreme winter cold, as well as the seclusion of the
18. HLM, 682: shug.pa'i ka. bu ka.zhu rnams.
19. Seen, for example, in the Ajanta cave temples. Ajanta, Introduction by A. Bareau, Texts by A. Okada, photos by
J.-L. Nou, Imprimerie Nationale, Paris 1991, p.20.
20. The author visited twice in 1999 & 2000.
21. BA, 897: "There (in 'Phan.yul Gyal) he made a stove which is even nowadays known for its remarkable way of
kindling without blowing." See Deb.sngon, vol.2, 1047: De'i tshe dam.pas Gyal.du dge, 'dun gyi 8.yog yun.ring.du
mdzad/thab cig kyang hcas.pa da.dung yang me rang. 'bardu 'gro.ba'i ngo.mtsharcan yang yod//



A Preliminary Note on the "Rin.chen bZang.po Temples of rKan.bzhi"
259
practitioners. From a first impression, and in spite of renovation of the terraced roofing in the main chapel,
much of the wooden structure must date back to the period of foundation.
Inside the four pillar chapel (approx. 8 x 6.30 x 7 H), the "Thousand Buddha" wall paintings date,
according to The History of Ladakh Monasteries to a restoration carried out after ca. 1870, by which time
the temple had fallen into disrepair. Two decades later, ca. 1891, Chos.grub Sod.nams bkra.shis of sTag.ma
gCig.pa became caretaker and restored the site. It was he who had the stong.sku wall paintings executed.
The tall pillars in dark red juniper have fluted vertical lines recalling columns in both ancient India, and
in the Greco-Bactrian world. The two rear capitals (nearest the altar) are finely carved with geometric vine-
scroll patterns and Buddha figures in the central sections [fig. 7). These recall to a certain degree the
sculptures on the outside of the Al.ci Sum.rtsegs. Two more weathered eleventh century capitals with similar
kinds of ornamentation have been used to form the present altar. They may have come either from the two
front pillars in the temple (which have somewhat simpler capitals), or more likely, they were taken from the
rather damaged gallery above the main door, where as is mentioned above, another similar weather-worn
capital is still in place [fig. 8).
Four beam-ends, protruding at the tops of the walls on either side of the temple on in parallel with the
four pillars are carved to form bright-eyed, bushy-tailed leonine forms painted recently in white, with their
eyebrows, moustaches and tails green, recalling those seen not only in Wanla & Alchi, but in temples all
over the Tibetan world. Here the form is rounder with the well-carved face and underbelly being most
visible. On the back wall a square niche contains two medium-sized clay stupa.
But who was the founder of La Cu.rtse? We know that the Great Lotsawa went twice or thrice to
Kashmir, firstly in 975, then again in 996, from whence he returned six years later, ca. 1002, with thirty-three
artists. During his long life, he attended on many teachers, and invited numerous pandits to Western Tibet.
He was the chief translator of his school for well over half a century, with many disciples gathering around
from mNga'.ris, dBus and gTsang, The Blue Annals gives a list including his four "heart sons", Lo.chung
rNgog Legs.pa'i Shes.rab (1011-1077), Gur.shing br Tson.'grus Gyal.mtshan of Mang.nang,24 gZhon.nu
Shes.rab of Gra (1014-1096), and Kyi.nor Ye.shes.dpal of Khri.thang, a further four were An.ston Grags.rin
of sPu.hrangs, Gya Ye.shes Tshul.khrims, Gung.pa Ye.shes, and don.mchog.brtsegs of Mar.yul (founder
of Al.ci),25 who were disciples of both Rin.chen bZang.po and Lo.chung Legs.pa'i Shes.rab. Shangs Sum-
ston Ye-shes-bar, and two from Myang.stod, ryang.pa Chos.blo of rGyang.ro sPe'u.dmar, and ICe.zhar,
also attended on the Lo.chen for several years. The translation activity continued long after his passing
away, with Tibetan, Kashmiri and Indian scholars continuing to work side by side, as is witnessed by the
1076 Council of the Fire Dragon in m Tho.ling,27 and by the translation activities and edict of Pho.brang
Zhi.ba.'od in 1092.
The very fine quality of the wood carvings of La Cu.rtse, and the oral tradition in rkan.bzhi (cf.
sKya.pa's temple, below), do in fact suggest that this is a "Rinchen bZang.po temple". Since we do not have
the list of the “108", and it is not mentioned in the few we know of, it is impossible to affirm that this small
retreat was really founded by him. However, it was certainly built during his life-time or soon afterwards,
22. HLM 682
23. Gu.ge Khyi.thang.pa. 17-19; Tucci, Indo-Tibetica II. 31: Vitali, op.cit, 188, 233, 241.
24. Approximate dates (10182-1079) etc., are as proposed in MF.
25. According to MF. See L. Fournier & P. Pal, Alchi. Une merveille de l'art bouddhique. Ladakh, New Delhi 1983,
19, where the author also considers that the Lotsawa Lhakhang was founded probably during the lifetime of
Rin.chen bZang.po.
26. BA, 352-354. Tashi Rabgyas, 81-82, gives a different list, taken from Khyi.thang pa's biography, 33
27. See Tucci, Indo-Tibetica II, Rin.chen bzang po and the Renaissance of Buddhism in Tibet, around the Millennium,
New Delhi 1988, 30, for references to the council. According to Rva. Lotsa.ba'i rnam.thar, mTsho.sngon 1990, 205-
206, the following Tibetan masters were present: Ngog.lo Blo.ldan Shes.rab, gNyan.lo Dar.ma.grags, b Tsan
Kha.bo.che, Khyung.po Chos.brtson, Mar.thung Dad.pa Shes.rab, Mang'or Byang.chub Shes.rab, Dvags.po
dBang.rgyal. See also Vitali 1996.



260
to
Heather Stoddard
perhaps by one of his first or second generation disciples, such as Mar-yul Lo-tsa-ba Kon-mchog-brtsegs,
or his co-disciple, dge-bshes Gung-pa Ye-shes who taught in Nyar.ma and founded Kar.sha, where fragments
of Kashmiri wall paintings are to be seen. Another possible candidate is Zangs-dkar Lo-tsa-ba 'Phags-pa
Shes-rab (1042-1115), the disciple of An.ston Grags.pa Rin.chen. He was a great scholar-ascetic from
Western Tibet, who continued Rin.chen bZang.po's line of the Yoga-tantra, 28 and is one of the best known
lotsawa of the following generation. He contributed to the diffusion of Buddhist texts in Mar.yul and
Zangs.dkar, and other areas of stod mNga'ris. He took part in the Council of the Fire Dragon, just at the
time when he was translating the treatise on logic, Tshad ma rnam.'grel.gyi rgyan,
Pramanavarttikalamkara. He also took responsibility for the rehabilitation of the Jo.khang in Lhasa,
probably during the following decade, in the 1080s.31
4. Kya.pa's Chapel
According to Jamyang Gyaltsen, this is the third of the "Rin.chen bZang.po" temples in Kan.bzhi. This is
the one that "was given by Rin.chen bZang.po into the care of a villager called skya.pa, and since he (& his
family) looked after it as if it were their own 'offering place', it has not been damaged or destroyed and can
still be seen just as it was". 12
This, the last and smallest of the four temples, lies below the old part of the village of Kan.bzhi, nearby
the Lha.khang Chung. The building consists of a simple square structure, with a single chapel inside
measuring approx. 4 x 4 x 3 m. H. In front of the chapel is a relatively spacious vestibule facing south with
a beaten earth floor. The wall paintings and sculptures inside suggest a date considerably later than Rin.chen
bZang.po, probably going back, as in Wan.la, to the initial period of 'Bri.gung influence in Western Tibet,
ca. 13th-14th century. It is possible that the original building was constructed at an earlier date, but the
simple wood carvings give no hint as to any technical or artistic link with La Cu.rtse.
The entrance to the vestibule is supported by a single pillar and crossbeam with some carved and stucco
motifs that are rustic in comparison to the refined sophistication of La Cu.rtse. A triple jewel is carved at the
centre inside of the beam, above the pillar.
The doorway into the temple is square and very low with the wooden door closing from within. The
floor is several centimetres lower than the vestibule. This is an ancient feature of Tibetan architecture that
helps with isolation from the cold. It is found in many houses in Tibet from Neolithic times onwards, notably
in the Barkhor in Lhasa. Here, the chapel is built in the fundamental one pillar unit size also known to
Tibetan architecture from early times. At the rear, a simple low altar has three half life-size stucco deities
enthroned in a similar early naive Western Tibetan style that was inspired by the art in Central Tibetan
monasteries of the 12th ca. and 13th centuries, brought to the West by the 'Bri.gung bka'.brgyud Ri.pa, or
“Men of the Mountains" yogins. The three stucco figures are of sPyan.ras.gzigs Yi.ge drug-pa (centre),
sMan.bla (proper right) and Green Tara (proper left) [fig. 9). According to Jamyang Gyaltsen, the mandala
wall paintings accompany the three images.24
28. BA, 354. Tucci, Indo-Tibetica II, 32-33.
29. Rva.lo'i mam.thar, 206; Tucci, Indo-Tibetica II, 30-33.
30. Tibetan Tripitaka, Beijing ed., Suzuki catalogue Tokyo 1962, no. 5719.
31. Vitali, Early Temples of Central Tibet, Serindia 1990, chapter 3.
32. HLM 681. sKya.pa, or sKya.mi usually mean simply "layman", in Central Tibetan dialect.
33. Christian Luczanits, "Early Buddhist Wood Carvings from Himachal Pradash", in Art of Tibet. Selected Articles,
from Orientations 1987-1997, 247-255. The wood carving in the temples of Kojarnath, Tabo, and especially the
Lotsawa Lha.khang in Ribba, central Kinnaur, Himachal Pradesh are extremely close to that in the La Cu.rtse
temple in Kan.bzhi.
34. As sgo.rdzogs (?). This unusual term appears again, HLM 682, this time together with the "wood sculpture", after
mention of the restoration made at La Cu.rtse, in 1819, by the new caretaker, Chos.grub bSod.nams bra.shis of
sTag.ma gCig-pa: ldebs.ris.su Sangs.rgyas stong.sku bzhengs yod/sngar sgo.rdzogs dang shing.bskos kyi bzo khyad
phul.du.byung.ba yod kyang, da.Ita shug.pa'i ka.ba bzhi. rnams la brkod yod.pa.tsam ma.gtogs gzhan.mnams
nyams.nas mi. 'dug//



A Preliminary Note on the "Rin.chen bZang.po Temples of Kan.bzhi"
261
The wall paintings are in a style that is coherent with the stuccos, though they are in a more pristine
condition. In the areas where there is no damage, e.g. at the back of the shrine, no sign of repainting can be
seen, and the colour and line are perfectly clear [fig. 10). The statues, on the other hand, may have been
restored and probably have been given several layers of new paint over the centuries. The mandala on either
side nearest the doorway are badly damaged by water infiltration from the roof, although it is possible in all
cases except one to establish the identity of the main deity. Two donor scenes are shown on either side, on
a level with the altar, illustrating no doubt the founding celebrations, and the guests of honour.
A long inscription in dbu.med script accompanies the scene on the right, as one faces the altar. It is
somewhat effaced and very difficult to read. However a certain number of elements can be gleaned, amongst
which customary laudatory verses glorifying the Buddhist teachings which are likened to the sun's rays:
considerations on the preciousness of this human existence; and the offering of the virtuous actions of the
body, speech and mind. The Lord of Death appears, suggesting that the inscription was made to
commemorate someone's passing away. A king and (his?) queen are mentioned, as are four/the fourth (?)
vihara, and the (Prajnaparamita in) Eight Thousand Verses. The yon.bdag, or sacristan's name was also
probably recorded. The inscription ends with customary humiliatory regrets on the part of the author,
requesting learned scholars to be patient with any mistakes he has made.
The Inscription
The inscription is written in black, uneven, closely written dbu.red script, in eighteen lines of quatrains with
approximately seven verses to each line. It is covered with varnish and damaged in places. It is included
here, in spite of the textual problems, as a basis for a possible better reading in the future.
1.1, Om svastill mkhyen brtse'i 'od.zer bye.ba phrag.rgyal brgya] yis/ chos.stong 'od.gsal spro.bye...
smun... nyi.dbang.po 'gro blo mun.sel. ma lus kun gselſsel).bas/thub.dbang hstan.pa... don.gnyis mar
rgyin? skyobs.pa sangs.rgyas.dang/bden.gnyis mthar phyin dbang...
... dang mkhyen gnyis mthar.phyin. 'phags.pa'i dge'dun gtso... thug skyahs lags... ma 'jig.rten
khyed.par mi.mdzad de.ste.../'e.ma.hol dal.'byor...
1.3, don.med stong.bya bsam/ 'e.ma.hol lus.kyi rgyal.sras mchod.pa... ngag.gi... yid.kyi rtag.tu dge.ba.../
'e.ma.ho... Ishogs gnyis 'phrul.la... ji.phyir...
1.4, lus... legs.par sems.
1.5, ?byol.lo gnas.tu...is snang.bsgoms gShin.rje'i dgra srung rnam'dir stebs dus g.... thar pa'i lam
dal. 'byor thob.pa...
1.6, dad.pa..
1.7, ... ba'i chos.la zhen.na...
1.8, nor kyang... sngon.du byas.pa...
1.9, ... gyi gying/?).pa'i mchog byung... ston.pas...
1.10, phu...
1.11, Ideng.kyi rigs...
1.12. rgyal.po...
1.13,... du bzhengs.../ 'e.ma.ho ya rabs.rnams ni... btsun.mo... stag.sha...
1.14, ... pha.ma rten.du bzo
1.15, gtsug.lag.khang bzhi.pa
1.16, ... /?/ brgyad.stong.pa... de la sogs.pa rgya ma mang du... kyi... pha.ma i snying sdug Iha'i gtso dga'
byas/ gnyis.pa... 'di khye grags bcod phyi.mi...
1.17.... dad.pa nas skye shi... chos du blangs// yon.bdag... kun blo nur?
1.18, snyan.sngags norbu'i 'phreng.ba 'dos ('dis?)/ rig.pa'i gnas... legs sbyangs.pa'i mkhas.par gyur...
tshe... skyon nongs.par.gyur na mkhas rnams bzod.par mdzod/ mi shes slong.pa rnams pas... //



262
SOBE
Heather Stoddard
SAVE
The Wall Paintings
B
O S
SED
A frieze of white geese in different supple postures runs all round the top of the wall paintings. Behind the
three statues on the altar at the top is a bka'.brgyud lineage. The central deities of five of the six mandala
may be identified as follows (see diagram, going alternately from proper right of the deities on the altar, to
proper left). Only the last, VI, is unidentifiable.
Mandala
1. Amitayus. Guru Padmasambhava is seated at the top left of the mandala, with an Indian master (?)
and monks to the top right. Below is the donor scene with dancers.
II. Crowned Vairocana with different forms of Avalokitesvara in the outer four corners. The inscription
is below this mandala.
III. The Five Tathagata. They have a large entourage, including monks inside the mandala. Manjusri and
Prajnaparamita (?) or else Manjusri's prajna are seated to the top right and left of the mandala.
IV. The Eleven-headed Avalokitesvara, with monks inside the mandala.
V. Mahakala with two arms. He is surrounded by twelve krodha, four offering goddesses, and four
guardians of the gates.
VI. The sixth mandala is badly effaced by water infiltration. It is impossible to establish the identity.
Sakyamuni with scenes from his life is found in registers below IV & VI.
The presence of monks inside the sacred space of the mandala is interesting and reinforces the relatively
early dating. In later times such an intrusion of human elements - even lamas - into the sublime area of the
Body, Speech, and Mind zones of the mandala seems to disappear. A 12th century Tibetan mandala from
Central Tibet includes a whole family, with father, mother and two sons, being initiated into the practice of
the yidam deity by "Guru Padmasambhava" himself. They are seated within one of the four main circles of
"deities" that surround the central figure of Che.mchog Heruka.35 Thus it is refreshing to see monks in a
similarly unorthodox, but eminently practical position - from a ritual point of view - in these early 'Bri.gung
mandala.
Thus, in spite of the local tradition, the four temples of ran.bzhi - as they stand today - are all quite
distinct in period, construction, content and style. Only one, La Cu.rtse, may be said to belong with certainty
to the Rin.chen bZang.po period. This and the other early chapel belonging to the "sKya.pa family" are small
but important cultural heritage sites of Ladakh. The superbly sophisticated 11th century Kashmiri wood
carvings in La Cu.rtse, and the fine 13th-14th century 'Bri.gung paintings in Kya.pa's Temple, are clear
evidence of rkan.bzhi's connections with main-stream historical and religious processes taking place in the
larger stod mNga'.ris skor.gsum context of Western Tibet over the centuries. They demonstrate the high
mobility of the population, as well as a real concern, and even a real struggle, on the part of the Buddhist
masters in the spread and maintenance of the teachings in the distant valleys of their territory, in past and
present times.
35. Published in the Japanese version of Wisdom and Compassion, Tokyo 1998, pl. 67.



A Preliminary Note on the "Rinchen bZang.po Temples of rKan.bzhi"
263
Figures



264
A
Heather Stoddard



A Preliminary Note on the "Rin.chen bZang.po Temples of Kan.bzhi"
265
5



266
En
Heather Stoddard



A Preliminary Note on the “Rin.chen bZang.po Temples of rKan.bzhi"
267
10



ON THE DATES OF THANG STONG RGYAL PO*
Tashi Tsering
(Amnye Machen Institute)
In a footnote to his 1970 introduction to Shangs pa bka' brgyud gser phreng Gene Smith observed:
"The dating of Thang-stong rgyal-po is an extremely complicated problem. According to the oldest edition
of his biography (Grub pa'i dbang phug chen po lcags zam pa thang stong rgyal po'i mam mtshar kun gsal
nor bu 'i me long in ff. 181) by Lo-chen 'Gyur-med-bde-chen, Thang-stong was born in Icags-mo-glang
(1361 or 1421). The last year mentioned in the work itself is sa-mo-yos (1459 or 1519) when his death is
nearing. The colophon tells us that the work was completed in sa-pho-byi-ba (1588 or 1648), 125 years after
the death of Thang-stong (1464 or 1524)."
Several sources on Thang stong rgyal po have become available after Gene Smith wrote this short
observation thirty years ago, based on a forcibly limited number of documents. The publication of the volumes
of the Thang stong snyan brgyud was followed by Cyrus Stearn's MA thesis and Janet Gyatso's Ph.D. thesis
dedicated to him. Finally, two more biographies of the great master, written by direct disciples, were published
almost fifteen years after Gene's remarks, to which a recently found biography should be added.
Making use of the presently available biographical documents about him, the aim of this paper is to focus
on the issue of Thang stong rgyal po's life span, raised by Gene Smith, wander a little through five available
biographies of Thang stong rgyal po,' and read between their lines, which will enable me to attempt a new
suggestion about his dates, and probe the meaning and reason of his long seclusion before death an inch further.
* I contribute here a short essay on a subject related to Gene's past research. Besides taking care of the release of this
Festschrift, this small token is a personal sign of my gratitude and great respect.
This article has been translated by Lobsang Thargay (New Delhi) from the Tibetan. I wish to acknowledge the kind
help of Isabelle Henrion-Dourcy for the initial editing; Roberto Vitali for the final editing and for working at the
translation of some passages; and Victoria Conner who had a last look at the English. However, any mistake or
shortcoming is entirely mine.
1. Please see Shangs pa Bka' brgyud gser 'phreng: A golden rosary of lives of masters of the Shangs pa dkar brgyud
pa Schools, published by Tashi Yangphel Tashigang, Leh, 1970, English introduction, footnote no. 10 on p. 4. Bod
ngya tshig mdzod chen mo, bar cha, Beijing, Mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 1985, p. 1141, has an entry on Thang stong
rgyal po identified as “Kam kam pa Brtson 'grus bzang po (1313-1385)." This needs further research. See also Mig
dmar blo bzang, "Grags can gyi lo rgyus mi sna grub thob Thang stong rgyal po'i skor rags tsam gleng ba," Bod
ljongs slob grwa chen mo'i rig deb, 2002, 'don 'thengs gnyis pa, pp. 29-36; Dung dkar tshig mdzod chen mo, Krung
go'i Bod rig pa dpe skrun khang, 2002, pp. 1031-1035. See Ho We & Bsod nams dbang 'dus, Bod kyi nang bstan
dgon pa'i Idebs ris sgyu rtsal, Fresco Art of the Buddhist Monasteries in Tibet, compiled by the Administration
Commission of Cultural Relics of the Tibetan Autonomous Region, Chengdu, 1994, p. 356, in which a portrait of
Thang stong rgyal po painted on a wall of Pho brang dmar po is reproduced. Three different sets of dates of grub
thob Lcags zam pa's birth and death appear in the trilingual caption accompanying the plate (i.e. his dates are given
as 1361-1485 in the Chinese text of the caption, 1385-1509 in the Tibetan text and 1361-1445 in the English!).
2. Cyrus Stearn, The Life and Teachings of the Tibetan Saint Thang-stong rgyal-po, "The King of the Empty Plain, "M.A.
Diss., University of Washington, Seattle, 1980; and Janet Gyatso, The Literary Transmission of the Tradition of Thang
stong rgyal po: A Study of Visionary Buddhism in Tibet, Ph.D. Diss., Berkeley University of California, 1981.
3. I have consulted the following biographies of Thang stong rgyal po. Four are major biographies of him, and one a
brief supplementary biography about his passing:
Rje grub thob chen po lcags zam pa'i rnam par thar pa ngo mishar ryva mitsho by his direct main disciple La stod
byang pa Shes rab dpal Idan. Published as The Collected Works (gsung 'bum) of Thang stong rgyal po Vol. 1 by the
National Library of Bhutan, Thimphu, 1984.
Bla ma Thang stong ryval po 'i rnam thar gsal ha i sgron me, by his direct disciples Dkon mchog dpal bzang and
Spa gro ba Bde ba bzang po of Bhutan. Published as The Collected Works (gsung 'bum) of Thang stong rgval po
Vol. 2 by the National Library of Bhutan, Thimphu, 1984.



On the Dates of Thang stong rgyal po
269
The paucity of dates
In the first place, we cannot avoid noticing the relative absence of clear dating in the biographies. The rnam
thar by his direct disciple La stod byang pa Shes rab dpal ldan, entitled the Ngo mtshar rgya mtsho, has 283
folios and the earliest appearance of a date is found as far down as on folio 79," which is the Water Tiger year
(1422). Dates given according to the sexagenary cycle occur only nine times and, on eleven occasions, they
are given according to the duodenary cycle. The Gsal ba 'i sgron me by his direct disciples Dkon mchog dpal
bzang and 'Brug spa gro ba Bde ba bzang po, in 108 chapters (the verso of the folio 15 is damaged) and 294
folios, has the first date only after folio 170, which is a Male Water Dragon year (either 1412 or 1472). The
sexagenary cycle is used only once in the biography, and the duodenary cycle on eleven occasions.
Byang ngam ring pa dKon mchog dpal bzang's Gsal ba'i sgron me, rather a commentary than a canonical
biography conceived in chronological order, contains a fifteen-stanza prayer by an unknown author dedicated
to Thang stong rgyal po, which begins saying: "with the aim of taming the sentient beings of the degenerate
time in Tibet" (snyigs dus bod khams 'gro ba 'dul ba'i phyir)', which was supplemented by bDe ba bzang po.
The prayer does not say: "In such a year this happened ...", as is normal in the account of ordinary beings, but
it describes the body, speech, mind, qualifications and activity in the three realms (i.e. those exoteric, esoteric
and innermost secret), typical of realised beings. The Ngo mtshar rgya mtsho and the Gsal ba'i sgron me were
copied from an old original kept in Bhutan and there are many omissions and mistakes that have crept in.
Thang stong rgyal po's dates as given in the sources
None of his early biographies, whether the Gsal ba'i sgron me, the Ngo mtshar rgya mtsho or the Kun
gsal sgron me, mention the year of his birth. According to the later Kun gsal nor bu'i me long (1609) by
Lo chen 'Gyur med dbe chen, a descendant of Thang stong rgyal po, he was born in the Earth Ox year of
Grub pa'i dbang phyug chen po lcags zam pa Thang stong rgyal po'i mam par thar pa kun gsal sgron me bdud
rtse'i phreng ba mthong bas yid phrog, by Sngags rams pa Kun dga' bsod nams grags pa dpal bzang, a son of La
stod byang pa Shes rab dpal ldan, written at the behest of one Blo gros rgyal mtshan, a descendant of Thang stong
rgyal po. The document is in the National Archives, Ramshahpath, Kathmandu, reel number AT 85/11. I would like
to thank my friend Dr. Roberto Vitali for not only informing me about the existence of this manuscript, but for also
kindly sending me the microfilm of it.
A small supplementary biography to item 3 (see above in the same note), entitled Grub thob chen po'i rnam thar
phyi ma las mya ngan las 'das pa'i skor, appended to the latter
Dpal grub pa'i dbang phyug brtson 'grus bzang po 'i rnam par thar pa kun gsal nor bu 'i me long by Lo chen 'Gyur
med bde chen, a descendant of Thang stong rgyal po, in 1609. Also see its published version: Thang rgyal ram
thar, Chengdu, Si khron mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 1982.
4. Ngo mtshar rgya mtsho (hereafter NTGT in the notes) p. 158:2.
5. Sprello (1428) NTGT, p.170:3; sa mo bya (1429) NTGT, p. 183:4; lcags pho khyi (1430) NTGT, p. 275:2; phag lo
(1431) NTGT, p.285:5; byi lo (1432) NTGT, p. 285:5; glang lo (1433) NTGT, p. 286:4; stag lo (1434) NTGT, p. 299:1;
yos lo (1435) NTGT, p. 299:3; 'brug lo (1436) NTGT, p. 322:3. p.329:4; me mo sbrul ( 1437) NTGT, p. 331:3; sbrul
lo (1437) NTGT, p. 343:3; sa pho rta'i zla 1 tshes 1 (1438) NTGT, p. 344:4; byi lo (1444) NTGT p. 358:1; rta lo (1450)
NTGT, p. 469:2; sa mo sbrul (1449) NTGT, p. 473:5; me pho byi ba (1456) NTGT, p. 488:5; 'brug lo (1460) NTGT,
p. 528:2; shing pho 'brug (1484) NTGT, p. 561:2; sa mo bya ( 1429) and shing pho 'brug (1484) NTGT, p. 561:3.
6. Rnam thar gsal ba' sgron me (hereafter NTSG in the notes) p. 340:5.
7. 1412 is too early and 1472 is too late, hence I question the accuracy of the year element (Water) and suggest that
this is a mistake that should be investigated.
8. 'brug lo (1412/1448) NTSG p. 348:6; rta lo (1426/1450) NTSG p. 348:6; lug lo (1427/1451) NTSG p. 351:3; 'brug
lo (1436 and 1448) NTSG p. 354:1, p.356:6, 366:2; rtag (sic) lo (1446/1458) NTSG p. 394:5; 'brug lo (1448/1460)
NTSG p. 440:4, 442:1; bya lo (?1381, 1441, 1453 and 1465) NTSG, P. 508:1.
9. In 1929 Rdza sprul Ngag dbang bstan'dzin nor bu was assigned by the Tibetan Government to restore the Gcung
Ri bo che sku 'bum mchod rten, which he could accomplish in 1932. A Guru Yoga text dedicated to Thang stong
rgyal po, entitled Grub pa'i dbang phyug Thang stong royal por mchod cing bstod pa'i bla mchod byin labs sprin
phung, and written in 1932, is derived from Rnam thar Ngo mtshar rgya musho as its author says. See the Collected
Works of Dzatrul Ngawang Tenzin Norbu, Kathmandu, 2004, Vol.1, pp. 345-374.



270
Tashi Tsering
the 6th rab byung (1361) at sunrise, on the 10th day of the 1st Tibetan month. The even later Baidurya
dkar po by Sde srid Sangs rgyas rgya mtsho' and the rNying ma'i chos 'byung' by Bdud 'joms Rinpoche
(possibly styled after the latter text) state that he was born in the Wood Ox year of the 6th rab byung
(1385). Therefore, if one must concede that he was born in an Ox year of the 6th rab byung, this would
have to be either the Iron Ox year (1361), the Water Ox year (1373) or the Wood Ox year (1385).
The Kun gsal me long has this to say about Thang stong rgyal po's death:
“Two sixty-year-cycles plus five years (after his birth], [Thang stong rgyal po) died in the Female Wood
Snake year of the 8th sixty-year-cycle (1485), on the 4th day of the 1% Tibetan month."!4
Similarly, in a small biography, supplementary to the Ngo-mtshar rgya mtsho and entitled Grub thob
chen po'i rnam thar phyi ma las mya ngan las 'das pa'i skor (henceforth Myang 'das), it is stated:
"The grub thob chen po, at the age of 128, turned his body into a huge formation of light and rose about
seven dpag tshad above his retreat hut on the 4th day of the 1" month, on which Buddha Shakyamuni
performed miracles, in the year of the Snake."
Hence this account suggests that the year of his passing occurred in the Female Wood Snake of the 8th
rab byung (1485).
According to the Kun gsal nor bu 'i me long, Thang stong rgyal po was born in the Iron Ox year (1361),
and died at the age of 125 in the Female Wood Snake year (1485). In the view of the Phyi ma las mya ngan
las 'das pa'i skor, he died at the age of 128 in the same year (1485). Bdud 'joms Rinpoche holds that he was
born in the Wood Ox year of the 6th rab byung (1385), and died at the age of 125 (1509/1510).
Rather than trying to go for historical accuracy, I think that what needs to be pondered is whether Thang
stong rgyal po lived for as long as 125 or 128 years, or whether his disciples and patrons, for various reasons,
just made it seem that he lived to such an exceedingly old age. What triggered my doubts is this quotation
in the Kun gsal nor bu'i me long:
"Again, one day, the grub thob chen po told Rje btsun Chos kyi sgron me: *I shall die in such a manner
that no one has seen in the past and no one will be able to see in the future.' Bde legs Chos sgron asked the
Rje btsun ma what this meant and she replied: 'It means that the way he will die is going to be so unique
that no one else before was so worthy to have it.' A prophecy on his life span says: 'Eighty (years) and a
decade is the limit of his life span. If the essence of the goddess of longevity (Tshe 'dzin lha mo) is
practised, a longer life may be attained.18
The Myang 'das rnam thar has a similar passage:
"Orgyan chen po said: 'The limit of the life span of the great being Lcags zam pa will be eighty years
and a decade. By practising the female deity of longevity (Tshe 'dzin lha mo), it is possible to live longer.*"19
Keeping his death a secret
I think that Thang stong rgyal po was born in 1385, the later one of the two proposed dates, and died either
at the age of 61 in the Fire Tiger year (1446), or at the age of 73 in the Earth Tiger year (1458). Great secrecy
10. Thang rgyal rnam thar, Si khron mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 1982, p. 18:2
11. Sde srid Sangs rgyas rgya mtsho, Baidurya dkar po, Vol. 1, Dehra Dun. 1978, f. 20ba 5.
12. Gsang chen sgna 'gyur rnying ma'i chos 'byung lha dbang g.yul rgyal, Kalimpong, 1963, f. 289na4 and 399nal.
13. Thang stong rgyal po took the monastic vow from Bla ma Nyi ma bzang po at Dgon pa Byang sdings. He received
his full vow from Dka' Inga pa Dpal 'byor shes rab at Mdog stod Skya ra'i dgon pa, and was given the name of
Dge slong Brtson 'grus bzang po.
14. Kun gsal nor bu 'i me long, p. 339:17.
15. Myang 'das rnam thar, f. 162na4.
16. Gsang chen sgna 'gyur rnying ma'i chos 'byung lha dbang g.yul rgval, f.290n2.
17. Here we need to check the original Dbus gtsang and Sde dge editions of Kun gsal nor bui me long to see whether
the Zhe chen Drung yig (late 18h century) changed "brgyad beu phrag geig" into "brgya bcu phrag gcig."
18. Kun gsal nor bu 'i me long, p. 338:17-339:5.
19. Myang 'das rnam thar, f. 161ba7.



On the Dates of Thang stong rgyal po
271
was then maintained about his death either for 39 years in the former case or 27 years in the latter case, and
the secret was finally revealed 100 years after his birth.
We get a hint of the delay in revealing the death of Thang storg rgyal po in the Gsal ba 'i sgron me which says:
"The grub thob chen po stopped talking in the 6th month of the Tiger year. He even blocked the
ventilation of his circular-shaped room (gzims khang gzhu sgor mo). He could neither be seen nor his speech
heard. It was as though he was not there. In front of his circular room hundreds of disciples, patrons and
devotees, men and women, assembled and arranged ritual offerings beyond imagination. They prayed and
supplicated: 'If you don't want to show yourself in person, (at least] speak to us. If you don't want to speak,
(at least] give us a note on your samta (“writing tablet"). ' For three months, he did not show himself; neither
spoke nor issued a note on his writing tablet and did not eat. After three months he passed a note on his
writing tablet which said: 'If anyone respects my word, forsake this life and be kind-hearted. Other than
that, he did not say [more). The note was written on the writing tablet in lantsa, wartu la, some Tibetan and
Dakini's script. [The disciples) pleaded: 'If the note is issued during the night, the readers need light, (while]
day and night are the same for the one who writes.' The answer to the supplication was given on the writing
tablet which was not different from a spoken reply. His body looked stout and huge unlike the past. Upon
seeing the features of his face everyone who had gathered there was extremely happy. Everyone made a
request and gave offerings. On that day he accepted eighty helpings of food. Even the ordinary beings who
were present had a pure vision (dag pa 'i snang ba)."20
The text continues in the following terms:
"The great disciples, who had gone to Dbus gtsang, Mon and Kong po to collect offerings, told the grub
thob chen po: '[You), grub thob chen po, are [always) in retreat. No audience is granted to those who come
near. The whole of Tibet, the Snowland, says that the grub thob chen po died. They do not believe (that you
are alive). Although we tell them that the grub thob chen po did not die, they don't think it is true.' The grub
thob chen po said: 'What proof do the people of Tibet have that I am dead?' The disciples replied: All the
Tibetans say: 'A few generations have elapsed since the grub thob chen po was seen last, and even a grub
thob would have died (in the meantime].' They do not think you are alive.' The grub thob chen po exclaimed:
*I am not a type of yogi who did not attain the freedom to die after becoming old. There are many prophecies
regarding my life span but none about one life span in particular. Those who wish I were dead can believe
I am dead. Those who do not wish I were dead can believe I am not dead. Those who wish to see me should
come to meet me. I shall come out of (my) seclusion door (sbug sgo).21 These statements show well
enough that some hidden plan was unfolding at the time.
The Myang 'das biography adds:
"The grub thob chen po said: 'My bones (perhaps his embalmed body?) should be put in the posture
of royal ease. An earthen reliquary mchod rten (sa'i bum sku) will do. In the daily routine do as if I were
alive; give orders to the gods, ghosts and humans, and continue to perform virtuous deeds. If you do not
wish to be different from me, do not do anything contrary to my (teachings). If you wish that everything
you do is for the benefit of others, abandon self-attachment. If you wish to attain Buddhahood, swiftly
uproot (any) wavering of the mind. Do not indulge in negligent idleness, but follow the example of the
bla ma. I appoint Nyi ma bzang po (Thang stong rgya! po's own son) as my successor. Work for
sentient beings indiscriminately and think only of the teachings. Do not care for women and wine. Learn
practical skills and farming. [If you do so), knowledge spontaneously arises like water sprouting into a
meadow. Taking this oath makes you not different from me. Whatever thought arises, let it surface
spontaneously. If you cannot follow these instructions, you should ride a blue mare towards the end of
20. Gsal ba 'i sgron me, p. 394:5-395:6; see also a shorter version in Kun gsal nor bu "i me long, p. 310:15, even though
it lacks dates.
21. Gsal ba'i sgron me, p. 477:3.
22. Thang stong rgyal po seemingly had more than one consort, for several sons are mentioned in different sources. The
Kun gsal nor bu 'i me long (p. 191) says: "His son Nyi ma bzang po was born in the Fire Dragon year (1436) amidst
a great many auspicious signs in the solitary cave to the left of Thar pa gling." The Gsal ba i sgron me (p. 354:1)



272
Tashi Tsering
your life.2Do what I told [you]. Whatever you practise, Buddha had some teachings for every kind of
obscuratism. No teachings should be discriminated into good and bad. Always] use a straightforward
approach.sNang tsam stong pa lags so/stong tsam na snang ba yin pa'i don chen po 'phral grub//.24 This
is the good aspiration of the wandering (yogin) Thang stong rgyal po. You should be able to keep my
death secret at the most for 100 years, otherwise for an average of 50 or 60 years, or else for a minimum
of 30 years. This is very important.**25
This excerpt is remarkably explicit and reminds us of the circumstances surrounding the death" of the
5th Dalai Lama.
The Myang 'das rnam thar further writes:
"Then we sought blessings from [Thang stong rgyal po's) wish-fulfilling mortal remains and made
offerings. Following the instructions of the grub thob chen po regarding his passing, Bstan 'dzin Rin po che
and I myself, his main disciple (Shes rab dpal ldan), kept the news of his death secret from the gods, ghosts
and humans, fearing that the distant disciples and patrons would be grief-stricken. For the sake of preventing
aggression by the Mongol border troops and keeping the status quo of the followers at the borders and in
central regions, Bstan 'dzin rin po che and his main disciple (La stod pa Shes rab dpal ldan) kept it secret to
all the gods, ghosts and humans, and made in a way as if Thang stong rgyal po was alive. Receptacles of the
body, speech and mind were made, geomantic spots were restored and negatives forces were subdued,
conquering the three worlds. Blessings contained in his authoritative messages as customary were sent out
for the benefit of sentient beings inside and outside [Tibet). As a result, the clairvoyance and miracolous
power of the grub chen's own compassion manifested in Bstan 'dzin Rin po che and the main disciple (Shes
rab dpal Idan) spontaneously. "26
On the reasons to keep his death secret
The Myang 'das biography continues:
"Indeed Bstan 'dzin Rin po che went to train disciples and collect offerings throughout the country for
thirty-two years. The main disciple Shes rab dpal ldan acted as if he was (tshab) the grub thob chen po.
There are great accounts of the way those two encouraged virtuous activities continuously. During this
period there were good harvests, timely rain, auspiciousness and happiness everywhere. There was no
trouble caused by the Mongols and other people from the frontiers. Both the religious and secular law
flourished in accordance with the teachings in a way that the mind cannot conceive. Thirty-two years
elapsed and owing to the ups and downs of the teachings, some people said it was better to reveal that the
grub chen was no more. They opened the reliquary and enshrined the body in a silver-made myang 'das
with a gilt copper rain-roof placed in the upper floor of the [the bla ma's) residence with a sixteen pillar
courtryard (surrounded] by an external and internal processional path in front of a two-pillar inner sanctum
(gtsang khang).27
adds about him: "On lo gsar of the Dragon Year (1448), it was announced that Nyi ma bzang po (was chosen as]
his successor." The same biography (ibid. p. 337) states that he had other sons, namely Byams pa snyan grags, Don
grub bzang po and Skyob pa bzang po.
The Gsal ba' sgron me (p.386) enumerates them as follows: "His successors in the parternal side of his lineage ...
[were] Sangs rgyas dbon chen Byams pa snyan grags, Sangs rgyas dbon chen Don drub bzang po, Sangs rgyas dbon
chen Rin chen mdzes pa'i dpal, Sangs rgyas dbon po Chos bzang, Sangs rgyas doon po Nor bu and others."
It seems that he had seven sons or nephews (dbon po?), including dbon po Chos skyong bzang po (ibid. p. 394).
Moreover, the Rta mchog Chos rje of Bhutan regarded himself as a descendant of Thang stong rgyal po.
23. The implications of this passage escape my understanding.
24. The implications of these passages again escape my understanding.
25. Myang. das rnam thar, 163ba2, Kun gsal nor bu'i me long, p. 341:10-342:15.
26. Ibid., 165na2-165na5.
27. See the Earth Dog 1898 description of his gdung rten by La dwags Ri rdzong sras sprul Blo bzang tshul khrims chos
"phel in Snyan rtsom bdud rtsi 'Yzegs ma: La dwags Pandita Ri rdzong Sras psrul blo bzang ishul khrims chos 'phel
gvi gsung thor bu sna tshogs dang ri mo phyogs bsgrigs. (Edited by Dge thub bstan chos grags) Vol.1, Yashodhara



On the Dates of Thang stong rgyal po
273
Pilgrims and devotees from all over the country seek its blessings even today."
The issue of keeping the death of Thang stong rgyal po secret is dealt with in Sde srid Sangs rgyas rgya
mtsho's Bso rig sman gvi khog 'bugs.' He first briefly introduces the interaction between La stod pa Shes
rab dpal Idan and his teacher: "When he was twenty-six years old, [La stod pa Shes rab dpal Idan) went to
see the lord of attainments Thang stong rgyal po. The instant he saw him, he was transfixed by extraordinary
blessings. He was his attendant for sixteen years. Since he received complete instructions (from grub thob
Lcags zam pa) and practised them, he became his main spiritual son."
The same passage then gets into the heart of the matter, for it says: "After grub dbang [Thang stong
rgyal po) transferred himself to a paradise, given that his (death] was kept secret for thirty-two years, [La
stod pa Shes rab dpal Idan) substituted him as if he was no different from him, and thus innumerable benefits
occurred to sentient beings."31
The reasons for keeping the death of Thang stong rgyal po secret are evident from what is mentioned
above. The practice of keeping the death of bla mas and rulers secret was popular in Tibet in antiquity. For
example, oral accounts say that the deaths of emperors and also of the great minister mGar were kept secret
from the Chinese. In later times, the passing of the 5th Dalai Lama was kept hidden for fourteen years," while
that of 'Brug pa zhabs drung Ngag dbang ram rgyal was concealed for nearly fifty-seven years.
The Myang 'das rnam thar offers enough proof that Thang stong rgyal po's son Bstan 'dzin Nyi ma
bzang po and his direct disciple La stod byang pa Shes rab dpal ldan kept his death secret. But it is
interesting to note that, for thirty-two years, La stod byang pa Shes rab dpal ldan acted as though he himself
was Thang stong rgyal po. I understand that the artifice was successfully worked out, because La stod byang
pa Shes rab dpal Idan was from the same region as the grub thob chen po, which meant that they spoke the
same dialect and perhaps even had similar facial features.
Immortality
Grub thob Rinpoche is regarded and respected as someone who attained freedom from birth and death, a
great being who achieved immortality. An old Tibetan saying recites:
"Grub thob Thang stong rgyal po stayed in the mother's womb for sixty years and, when he was finally
born, he had white hair and a white beard and goatee; his forehead and face were full of wrinkles.34 This
unusual feature is somewhat confirmed by the reference in Gsal ba'i sgron me to the fact that Thang stong
rgyal po remained in his mother's womb for 12 months.
Other biographies had to omit the death date of Thang stong rgyal po. The case of the rnam thar of the
grub thob chen po by his direct disciple La stod byang pa Shes rab dpal ldan is meaningful. He does not say
Publications, New Delhi, 2000, pp. 151-154. In autumn 1967, fearing that this mummy may be damaged by the
Chinese, a monk named Chu ba Bsod nams, accompanied by three others, moved it to a safe and secret site. However,
the Chinese authorities discovered their attempt and they were forced to hand it over to them. On that day, these
monks were tried in a struggle session in front of an assembly of 200 people and finally the stupa was thrown into
the Yar lung river. See the account published in Bod kyi dus bab, Dharamsala, 20 March 2000, p. 5.
28. Myang 'das rnam thar, p. 166na 1-166na6.
29. Also mentioned in Cyrus Steams, 1980 n. 49.
30. Kan su'u mi rigs dpe skrun khang, Ziling, 1982, p. 324:4-8.
31. Kan su'u mi rigs dpe skrun khang, Ziling, 1982, p. 324:8-10
32. Sde srid Sangs rgyas rgya mtsho, Pad dkar 'dzin pa ngur smrig gar rol Inga pa drug par phos pa'i gtam ma ba'i
bcud len: W.D. Shakabpa, Political History of Tiber, (Tibetan Version) Vol. 1, Shakabpa House, Kalimpong, 1976,
p. 457-487. On the issue of keeping his death secret for a long time see also the rare Rdo rje dzin pa che mchog
'dus pa rtsal gvi rnam par thar pa las 'phros pa'i byung ba brjod pa gdung ba'i mun sel by Rig pa 'dzin pa bZhad
pa'i rdo rje, written in 1735, which is going to be published by the Amnye Machen Institute.
33. See Micheal Aris, Bhutan, The Early History of a Himalayan Kingdom, Aris & Philips, Warminster, 1979, p. 233-254
34. Gzhis ka rtse. Yul srol goms 'dris, Gzhis ka rtse'i bryan deb rtsom sgrig u yon Ihan tshogs, 1993, p. 38.
35. Rnam thar Gsal ba'i sgron me, p. 87:1. When a Tibetan sees an old man with long white hair, long white beard and
goatee, he says: "He looks like Grub thob Thang stong rgyal po!"



274
OR
Tashi Tsering
anything about his passing, but restrains himself to a reference to the Male Wood Dragon year (1484), the
year before the secret was revealed, this being the last date appearing in the biography. Is this a sign that he
aimed to attribute immortality to his teacher or was it because the life of La stod pa Shes rab dpal ldan
himself was coming to an end?
The only hint in the biography by his direct disciples Dkon mchog dpal bzang and Bde ba bzang po to
the death of Thang stong rgyal po is a passage in which some of his followers and patrons asked whether
the grub thob chen po had died.
The Phyi ma las mya ngan las 'das pa'i skor and the biography by Lo chen "Gyur med bde chen say
respectively that the grub thob chen po died at the age of 125 and 128. Their reckoning of the period in
which the death of the master was kept secret covered the years from 1485 until 1517, when he would been
157 or 160 years old. According to his main disciple La stod byang pa Shes rab dpal ldan, who acted as if
he was the grub thob chen po, he was born in 1361 and died in 1485, and that thirty-two years should be
added to the latter date, which would make Thang stong rgyal po live until the age of 157 or 160.
Is this the reason for the fideistic acceptance of his abnormally long life in the view of the Tibetan
people in general and, in particular, of the devout practitioners with pure vision?
As late as in the present century the Rnying ma'i chos 'byung by Bdud 'joms rin po che (1961) states:
"Though he naturally was a great lord of realisations, he expressly received teachings from over 500
teachers,"36 and adds further:
"Finally at the age of 125, when he actually went to heaven, his son Nyi ma bzang po (sic: La stod pa
Shes rab dpal Idan was the person who actually did so) prayed, Thang stong rgyal po returned (from death]
and left his extensive spiritual will. He died at Dpal Ri bo che. Mnga' ris Grub chen Tshul khrims bzang po,
who lived for 130 years and finally dissolved his body into an immense light formation, and Grub thob Phyar
thul can in Eastern Tibet, seem to have been manifestations of the grub chen. His wisdom body (ye shes kyi
sku) has guided many people with good karma (las can) (and this continues) even at present. Many disciples
existed. Owing to the grub chen attaining immortality, innumerable disciples who were his lineage holders
obtained the power of long life (tshe'i dgnos grub). The profound teachings of the Thang stong Oral
Transmission still exist, and the tradition of longevity is practised by both the old and new schools."37
Thang stong rgyal po received teachings from various masters in India, Java, the Kathmandu Valley and
other lands, who had achieved immortality through yogic practice.
For instance, the Kun gsal me long says:
"The Tibetan yogi (Thang stong rgyal po] went to India and, at a place called g-Ya ri sgo Inga, at the border
between India and Nepali, met a great scholar who had achieved immortality and was a disciple of Mi tra
dzo ki. Upon their getting together (he) prophesied: 'Your activity will be extensive in the future.""38
It further says:
"[Thang stong rgyal po) went to Nalanda and met Siddha A ti ka ra who was 230 years old."39
And it adds:
"At gSang ba rdo rje phug, near Bodh Gaya, he met Skal ldan rdo rje grags pa, a grub thob of gSang
sngags rnying ma,"
and concludes: "I, Skal Idan rdo rje grags pa, am 320 years old. I have given 700 empowerments from
the time of the opening of the door of the teachings until now."40
It thus ensues that, like the grub thob chen po, the masters from whom Thang stong rgyal po sought to
receive teachings had also achieved immortality.
The Rnam thar ngo mtshar rgya mtsho says: "He went to Lhar (sic) gdong and met blon po bSod nams
mchog who offered him a crystal rosary with 100 beads. He told [Thang stong rgyal po] that there were some
36. Gsang chen sgna 'gyur rnying ma'i chos 'byung lha dbang g.yul rgyal, f.290na4.
37. Ibid., f. 290na2.
38. Kun gsal nor bu'i me long, p. 52:6.
39. Ibid., p. 56:6.
40. Ibid., p. 60:4.



On the Dates of Thang stong rgyal po
275
obstacles to the fact that he could have a long life and recommended he should have a retreat. Bla ma Kun
spangs pa said: 'You can live 100 years. If you can do that, even your monk successors shall have the
conditions of living a long life.""*4!
Such statements by disciples stem from their devotion, respect and belief in their bla ma. They are
meant to inspire others to set on the path of liberation and obtain a higher rebirth.
The erudite scholars and grub thob-s of ancient Tibet, when they wrote the biographies of grub thob-s,
renunciates, yogis and those who have overcome illusion, go beyond the comprehension of commoners.
There is evidence that mere calculations of birth and death dates are liable to open reprimand. For example,
the 5t Dalai Lama rebuked Dpa' 'o gtsug lag phreng ba for his analytical assessment of the dates of Guru
Rinpoche's arrival and sojourn in Tibet. 2 Brag sgo Rab 'byams's questioning of the authenticity of Rnam thar
Bka' thang, the biography of Guru Padma 'byung gnas, was refuted by Rtse le sna tshogs Rang gro143 and
the 5th Dalai Lama. These cases are an indication of the general attitude and acceptance of the use of dates.
Many manifestations
The Kun gsal nor bu 'i me long says:
"Tai Situ Lha btsan skyabs extended to the grub thob chen po himself a splendid welcome at Shel dkar
Zam sna'i Gur. One [of Thang stong rgyal po's) manifestations lived at Shri Rgod tshang; another
manifestation headed the fasting gatherings in front of the skyid grong Jo bo; one more manifestation led
the recitation of Mani in the land of Snye shangs; another manifestation meditated on Clear Light at the
upper residence of Dpal Chu bo ri; a further manifestation stayed in front of the Lha sa Jo bo; another
manifestation did the Tshes bcu rites at Zab bu lung: one manifestation lived in Kong po; another
manifestation gave instructions on building an iron bridge at Stod lung; one more manifestation lived at Sa
skya. All turned the wheel of the teachings for the benefit of the sentient beings.944
The reason or significance of Thang stong rgyal po showing many manifestations at the same time and
his attainment of the above-mentioned immortality is explained in the Kun gsal sgron me:
***Ho! Grub thob chen po! Why is it that we see different sights (of you]? The grub thob chen po replied:
"To control rlung sems, to control rang snang, and to subdue gzhan snang, various miraculous physical forms
should be shown to tame the beings of the three realms according to the various kinds of their faith.""45
The Gsal ba'i sgron me has Thang stong rgyal po saying:
"I have worked for the benefit of sentient beings in 100,000 rebirths. In this birth I have established a
good karma with the people of Lho 'Dzam bu gling. I have travelled across all the countries twenty-eight
times. I have founded Dpal Idan Ri bo che, the holy site prophesied by the three jewels. With a view of an
interdependent nexus to benefit the beings of Lho 'Dzam bu gling, I sat on the same couch without moving
for twenty-three years. I spent fourteen years without speaking."46
Generally, people such as the renunciates, yogis, grub thob-s and tantric practitioners of Tibet, having
cut the chain of attachment, are way beyond the views, thoughts and manners of ordinary beings. Ordinary
perceptions, such as the place of birth, names of parents and relatives, dates of birth and death, or the duration
of one's life, are mere gossip influenced by ordinary worldly behaviour and habits. This is why various
41. Ngo mishar brgya mtsho, p. 451:1-451:2.
42. Za hor gvi ban de Ngag dbang blo bzang rgya mtsho'i 'dir snang 'khrul pa'i rol rtsed rtogs brjod kyi tshul du bkod
pa Du ku'u la'i gos bzang las glegs bam gnyis pa bzhugs, "Bras spungs dga'Idan pho brang spar ma, f. 137ba2-
139na5; U rgyan ghu ru Pad ma 'byung gnas kyi skyes rabs rnam par thar pa rgyas par bkod pa Pad ma bka i
thang yig ces bya ba bzhugs, Dga' ldan phun tshogs gling edition, f. 223ba3-224bal.
43. See Slob dpon rin po che Pad ma'i rnam thar chen mo las brtsams te dri ba'i lan nges don gsal byed in the
Collected Works (gsung 'bum) of Rise le sna shogs rang grol. Vol. No. 3, Sanje Dorji, New Delhi, 1974. pp. 271:1-
343:4
44. Ibid., p. 270.
45. Kun gsal sgron me, f. 146na6-146ba2.
46. Gsal ha' sgron me, p. 441:1.



276
Tashi Tsering
appellatives such as Smyon pa brtson 'grus," Lung stong smyon pa," Rkyen gang byung ro snyom po, 49 Zas
gang byung bcud len poso and 'Khrul zhig bya bral chos rjes have been used for the grub thob chen po.
Hence, it is traditional for the male and female grub thob-s and renunciates of Tibet to ignore their age
and mundane accounts, and leave them untold.
For example, the autobiography of Dza sprul Ngag dbang bstan'dzin nor bu (Rdza rong phu edition) says:
"[In 1885] a yogini from the Mdo smad region, though the inner nature could hardly be detected, her
external behaviour was that of giving up ordinary meals for the whole of her life and living on a meagre
consumption of azalea (balu) and hot water with milk. She was a yogini who could stay upright day and
night for an entire year in stone caves and shelters with an opening of about four mtho (i.e. the distance from
the thumb to the middle finger). She gave prophesies, and all kinds of people, high and low, monks and
laymen, in upper and lower Dbus gtsang, treated her as the jewel of the crown. She was believed to be the
embodiment of Arya Tara. She was called Chu bzang rje btsun sku zhabs (d. 1921), in the lands of Dbus
gtsang, and Ani Khams mo in La stod. She arrived at Rdza rong after offering prostrations at La phyi. She
stayed in a cave in Gling smad. As soon as I reached there, she devoutly welcomed me with incense and
said: 'Sprul sku Rinpoche, you are going to be [someone) who will make the teachings shine.' I asked her
about her birth place, her practice and the bla ma-s from whom she had received teachings. She replied: 'I
am a beggar from Khams who is on pilgrimage. I have never had a bla ma and have not practised the
teachings even for a moment. Except for Sgrol ma and Mani, I know nothing.""*2
I feel that such a tradition exists with not only with the male and female Buddhist grub thob-s of Tibet
but also among those of Hindu yogis and Sufis. The Kun gsal sgron me adds:
"Three Khams pa monks from Byang Stag lung came to see the grub thob chen po. One Khams (pa)
monk saw the grub thob chen po as a youth, about twenty-five years old, handsome like the son of the gods.
One Khams (pa) monk saw the grub thob chen po as a middle-aged man, with an imposing figure, about 40
years old and with a great radiance. One Khams (pa) monk saw the grub thob chen po as an aged person, with
white hair, a bent back and using a walking stick. The three monks, having returned to Byang Stag lung
monastery, spoke about what they saw. A 70-year old man said: 'It is true that the grub thob chen po is old. I
am 70 years of age. When I was seventeen years old, the grub thob chen po was already old. Now that I have
aged that much, the grub thob chen po cannot be a youth aged twenty or thirty years. The other Dge bshes-
s said: "The grub thob chen po Lcags zam pa is known as an incarnation of O rgyan Padma 'byung gnas.
Padma 'byung gnas lives in Orgyan, the land in the south-west. It is said that he shows himself to the demons
as a young, middle aged and old man, but he is one and the same [person). So all three of you are right.**53
Similarly, Shug gseb A ni Lo chen, a woman who was the lord of attainments and lived about fifty years
ago, is believed to have lived for ninety-eight years by Hor khang Bsod nams dpal "bar,54 about 100 years
by Khu nu Mthar phyin Babu and by Mkhas btsun bzang po Rinpoche;56 113 years by Lha lung pa Blo
bzang Phun tshogs;7 and 130 years by Phreng ring Lha lcam. Her actual life span was eighty-six or eighty-
47. Thang rgyal rnam thar p. 34:15.
48. Thang rgyal rnam thar, p. 74:15; Gsal ba 'isgron me, p. 118:3; 406:2 and p. 494:2.
49. Thang rgyal rnam thar, p. 74:19; Ggsal ba'i sgron me, p. 406:2 and p. 494:2.
50. Gsal ba 'i sgron me, p. 119:1.
51. Gsal baisgron me. p. 119:3.
52. Rdza rong phu edition f.79ba6.
53. Rnam thar kun gsal sgron me, f. 132na5; see also Thang rgyal rnam thar, p. 312:5.
54. Shug gseb rje btsun rin po che Rig 'dzin Chos dbyings bzang mo'i rnam thar mdor bsdus, Bod ljongs zhib 'jug,
1989 (1) p. 132:23.
55. Yul phyogs so so'i gsar 'gyur me long (The Tibet Mirror), 1 September 1951, front page, Mirtag 'chi ba 'i dran bskul.
56. Mkhas btsun bzang po, Snga 'gyur rying ma ba'i bla ma brgyud pa rjes 'brangs dang bcas pa'i rnam thar ngo
mtshar rgva mtsho'i smad cha, LTWA, Dharamsala, 1973, p. 530:6.
57. Tibet The Sacred Realm; photographs 1880-1950, New York, Aperture Inc., 1983, p. 33.
58. Daughter of Tibet, John Murray, 1970, p. 167; see also Tsultrim Allione, Women of Wisdom, Routledge & Kegan
Paul, London, 1984; Hanna Havenevik, Tibetan Buddhist Nuns, Norwegian University Press, 1989, pp. 76-78, and



On the Dates of Thang stong rgyal po
277
seven years, her dates being 1865-1951. But her disciples, patrons and further disciples like to think she
lived until a remarkably old age, and truly hold this belief.
The editors and publisher of the 1949 autobiography of Shug gseb Ani Lo chen state: "This short
biography of her is up to the Earth Ox year (1949). The account of her reaching 100 years of age remains to
be added hereafter. This is all for now."59
The entry year of her birth, originally given as Wood Rat (1864), was erased and changed into Water
Rat (1852) in the 1975 edition of the autobiography of Shug gseb Ani Lochen, entitled Rnam mkhyen bde
ster and published in 1975 by her direct disciples, the scholarly couple, to make this event happen earlier,
so that her life span was extended to over 100 years of age.
The autobiography of Shug gseb Ani Lo chen further says:
"The regent Rwa greng Rin po che (r. 1934-1940) arrived here on his pilgrimage to the south. My
disciples and the aristocrats told [me] to go and visit the regent as a sign of respect for him. They were ready
to carry me on their back, but the Rinpoche regent came alone to see me. He asked me: 'How long is it since
you came here? How old are you now?' I replied: "When I came here, my mouth was full of teeth and my
hair was black. Now I have no teeth and my head is white."
Thus she thought there was no need to disclose her age. Such an attitude is still widely practised, and
there is no reason to believe that it will not be common in the future.
Appendix
Appointment of his son as successor: whether or not the Lcags zam incarnations are
ma 'das sprul sku
Soon after the Sku 'bum mchod rten of Ri bo che was completed in the Fire Male Mouse Year (1456), the
Kun gsal me long says: "His son Nyi ma bzang po was appointed to be his successor."62
It further says: "At that time, Thang stong rgyal po was surrounded by a great number of people
belonging to different races, who had assembled to listen to his discourses. On one such occasion he said:
"I have a great number of holy objects, bridges and ferries. It is important to have someone who can look
after them. I have consulted gods, ghosts and humans. Disciples from Mon and Kong po have suggested that
I should appoint a member of (my] clan. Some have suggested that I should appoint a disciple. The Sne pa
family from Lha sa has suggested that I should appoint both a member of (my) clan and a greatly
knowledgeable disciple. The divination conducted in front of the Jo bo Shakya muni suggested that it is best
to appoint a descendant from my clan. Therefore I have now appointed Btsun pa Nyi ma bzang po to be my
successor. Therefore you all should bear this in mind."
This biography says that the appointment of his successor took place in 1456. In the closing pages, the
same rnam thar has a controversial statement because it records that he lived for 125 years and appointed
his successor just before his death in the Wood Snake year (1484).
I believe that the appointment of his successor took place in 1456, and thus well before his passing. It
was not done in the manner of disciples requesting the teacher to be reborn swiftly.
her Ph.D. thesis on Shug seb Lo chen; The story of a Tibetan Yogini, Shugsep Jetsun. (1852-1953), prepared by Kim
Yeshe & Acharya Ven. Tashi Tsering with assistance of Sallie Davenport & Dorjey Tseten, Choyang, The Voice
of Tibetan Religion and Culture, Year of Tibet Edition, 1991, pp. 130-143; Janice D. Willis, Tibetan Ani-s: The
Nuns 'Life in Tibet, The Tibet Journal, LTWA, Dharamsala, 1984, Vol. IX, no. IV. pp. 20-23, and L.P.Lhalungpa's
interview in Parobola, Vol. III, no. 4, November, 1978. p. 49.
59. Gangs shug ma Ni lo chen rig 'dzin Chos nyid bzang mo 'irnam par thar pa mam mkhyen bde ster, p. 557:5.
60. Gangs shug ma Ni lo chen rig 'dzin Chos nvid bzang mo'i rnam par thar pa nam mkhyen bde ster, published by
Kazi Sonam Tobgye, Snga 'gyur rnying ma'i gsung rabs Series, Volume 22. Gangtok, 1975.
61. Ibid., pp. 450:4-451:1.
62. Ibid., p. 284:8.
63. Ibid., pp. 333:14-334:5.



278
Tashi Tsering
Of course many emanations (rnam 'phrul/sprul) of Thang stong rgyal po existed after he died.
However it does not seem that there was a line of successive incarnations which could be neatly listed in
chronological sequence.
One should add that the line of reincarnation called the Lcags zam sprul sku or Bstan 'dzin chos rje of the
Lcags zam Chu bo ri monastery is not the direct incarnation lineage of Thang stong rgyal po, but that of Bstan
'dzin nyi ma bzang po, the son he appointed to be his successor. Today the latter reincarnation line is regarded
as the one of Thang stong rgyal po. When it discusses this lineage of the Lcags zam sprul sku, the 13th Dalai
Lama's biography indeed defines it as "the reincarnation [line] of Grub thob Thang stong rgyal po."4
Should it be considered an authentic tradition, then one can say that this perhaps is one of the earliest
cases of "ma das sprul sku," i.e. an incarnation born before the previous one died.
As has been said above, Thang stong rgyal po's son Bstan 'dzin Nyi ma bzang po was born in 1436
and died at the age of seventy-three.65 From him to the present day, there has been a line of eleven
successive incarnations. The present one, bShad sgrub Bstan 'dzin chos 'phags, was born in 1974 in
Bhutan, where he lives. 66
The first in the line of Bstan 'dzin Nyi ma bzang po's incarnations was an ordained monk. All the
biographies of Thang stong rgyal po speak of him as "the monk" (btsun pa) Nyi ma bzang po. He is depicted
in a thang ka in the possesson of the present incarnation in Bhutan. He is depicted with monk's robes,
wearing a pan zhwa hat, with the right hand in the threatening gesture, and also displaying an iron chain.
64. 'Phags pa jig rten dbang phyug gi enam sprul rim byon gyi "khrungs rabs deb ther nor buli phreng ba, deb Inga
pa, Varanasi Legs bshas dpe mdzod khang, 1978, p. 508:3.
65. Bod kyi gal che'i lo rgyus yig tshang bdams bsgrigs, Gangs can rig mdzod No. 16, Bod ljongs Bod yig dpe rying
dpe khrun khang, 1991, p. 294:20.
66. Tibetan government documents and the Lcags zam Chu bo ri monastery refer to the dgon pa as "Lcags zam Chu
bo ri ban gtsang 'dus sde," "the assembly of the pure ban (dhe] ("monks") of Lcags zam Chu bo ri." Even the title
of their Chos spyod reads: "Lcags zam ban gtsang 'dus sde'i zhal 'don thams cad mkhyen pa'i lam gyi jug mgo
chos spyod kyi rim pa gser gyi phreng ba," which means that all the residents of this monastery should be celibate
monks. However, the followers of the Lcags zam school are mostly Ser khyim pa ("married lay practitioners").



THE NAMES OF 'GOS LO TSĀ BA GZHON NU DPAL (1392-1481)*
Leonard W. J. van der Kuijp
(Harvard University)
Gene's passion for Tibetan history has been, I daresay, contagious to many of us, and I take a keenly
felt delight in penning these few lines as a formal "thank you for his proverbial kindness and
generosity, and en homage to his inestimable contributions to the field of Tibetan Studies. Were it
not for his timely vision of how best to preserve the enormous legacy of Tibetan letters from the
late 1960s onward and his continuing untiring efforts to bring this about through his foundation of
the Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center, Inc., New York, NY (tbrc.org), I think it safe to say that I
and others would most probably not be doing what we are doing now. Dank ye wel, Gene!
The scholar monk 'Gos Lo tsa ba Gzhon nu dpal was part of a group of intellectual luminaries that dominated
the scholarly scene of the Central Tibetan area of Dbus during the fifteenth century. Spanning eleven years
short of a hundred, his long life formed the subject of a substantial, if at times uneven, retrospective biography
his disciple Zhwa dmar IV Chos kyi grags pa ye shes dpal bzang po (1453-1524) completed on 5 May, 1517
at his new see of Yangs pa can. He does not say way, it seems suddenly and out of the blue, he felt compelled
to write it so long after the master's passing, nor does he make mention of anyone having requested him to
do so. This lack of any explicit background information on the circumstances that surround its composition
stands in some contrast to his much more detailed study of the life of Khrims khang Lo tsā ba Bsod nams
rgya mtsho'i sde (1424-82), another one of his teachers, who probably died on 19 September, 1482.
According to its colophon, Zhwa dmar IV began to compile his narrative at the behest of Dpal bzhi 'dzom
Rin chen don yod alias Bsod nams ye shes bzang po of the ruling family of Yar rgyab - this nobleman, the
grandson of the powerful Drung chen Bzhi 'dzom pa (1372-1446), had accompanied his request with a so-
called "golden flower" (gser gyi me tog) incentive -, immediately upon the conclusion of the funerary rituals
held in honor of the deceased by first arranging in chronological order the notes on his life that another
disciple of his, by the name of Byams pa kun dga', had made earlier. He started his project on 25 October of
that same year, and was able to complete most of it at his earlier see of Lhun grub lha rtse, a hermitage nestled
in the lower part (mda) of Dol, the small valley that spills into the large Grwa thang plain. Exactly one month
later, on 25 November, he put the finishing touches on it, all the while with Byams pa kun dga' at his side as
his amanuensis. A blockprint of an edition in one hundred and seventeen folios from the printing blocks
houses at his later see of Yangs pa can monastery, now utterly laid waste, has yet to be located.
In the concluding remarks of his study of "Gos Lo tsa ba's life, Zhwa dmar IV acknowledges his debt to
an earlier biography by Smon lam grags pa, another disciple of 'Gos Lo tsā ba, who occasionally functioned
as his master's amanuensis, which has not surfaced so far, and writes that a certain Ratnamangala (- Rin
chen bkra shis) was the scribe for this work. A good reason for its composition is of course that "Gos Lo tsă
ba had functioned as abbot during his final ordination as a monk in the first half of 1478. But this still does
not really explain the thirty-five year hiatus between his death and the composition of the biography. It is
thus more than probable that the existence of Smon lam grags pa's earlier work had as much to do with his
delay as it had with Zhwa dmar IV reflecting on and taking stock of his own life as it was drawing to its
inexorable end. As they stand, both biographies read like a who-is-who in the business of religion and
politics of the era and region and, though by no means unique, they form enormously important sources for
our understanding of this period.
Widely sought after as a Sanskritist-translator (lo tsā ba) and recognized as an impartial master of things
religious, 'Gos Lo tsă ba was also the author of a considerable body of interpretive work, ranging from
numerous commentaries on Indian Buddhist texts to treatises on Buddhist philosophy, computational
astronomy and perhaps also Sanskrit grammar. Several of these were printed in his lifetime. Among them
are his 1442-3 *Bstan rtsis 'khrul sel, a work on computational astronomy and religious chronology (bstan



280
Leonard WJ. Van Der Kuijp
rtsis), for which blocks were carved before 1468, and his 1467 refutation of Red mda' pa Gzhon nu blo gros'
(1349-1413) aspersions on the authenticity of the Laghukālacakratantra, titled Dpal dus kyi 'khor lo'i rtsod
lan gdung sel ku ma da'i dga' ston. The latter is the nineteen-folio print that was financially subvented by
Rin chen chos kyi rgyal po of the Yab rgyab family. He was of course Gran-Governor (dpon chen) Rin chen
bzang po (?-1475/6) or Rin chen chos rgyal dpal bzang po, the father of Rin chen don yod. Though the
blocks may not have been carved during his life, a print of 'Gos Lo tsa ba's huge 1473 exegesis of the
Uttaratantra was filmed by the N.G.M.P.P. and Dr. Kl.-D. Mathes, its director from 1993 to 2001, has
completed an as yet unpublished study of it. But 'Gos Lo tsa ba especially gained posthumous fame for his
Deb gter (or: ther) sngon po, a Leviathan-like study of major and minor Buddhist traditions in Tibet and
their Indian (including Kashmirian) and/or Nepalese antecedents, he may have compiled from 1476 to 1478.
Indeed, it is as a premier historian that, not unlike Gene himself, his name has become a household word
among Tibetans and Tibetanists, ever since it was blockprinted and its English and Chinese translations were
published. The former translation by G. Roerich and his learned Tibetan friend and informant Dge 'dun chos
phel (1903/5-51) was first published in Calcutta, in 1949, and was subsequently reprinted several times, the
latter, by Guo Heqing, was only published as recent as 1985.
'Gos Lo tsā ba is known under some three other names: "Spob bdar," "Rtsed thang Lo tsā ba" - rtsed is
occasionally spelled rises, which may be acceptable, but the other spellings rise and dang for thang, though
equally homophonous and not infrequent in the literature, are incorrect, and "Yid bzang rtse pa" or "Yid
bzang rtse pa the Former (snga ma)." The first of these three eponyms is first and, so far, only noted by Gser
mdog Pan chen Shākya mchog Idan (1428-1507) in his 1474 biography of his master Rong ston Shakya rgyal
mtshan (1367-1449). I am not sure why, as he says, Lo chen 'Gos Lo tsā ba was known (grags) under this
name or term whose meaning frankly escape me in its entirety. Elsewhere, for example, in his biography of
Spyan snga Kun dga' rdo rje (1424-?), the fifth abbot of Rong ston's see of Nalendra, and his 1495 study of
the history of religious convocations (chos [kyi] 'khor [lo]), Gser mdog Pan chen uses "Mkhan chen Gzhon
nu dpal" or the less ambiguous, for "Gzhon nu dpal" is not altogether an uncommon name in religion, "Lo
tsā ba Gzhon nu dpal."
The second sobriquet has its origin in the intimate connections he enjoyed with most of the
contemporary ruling elite of the Phag mo gru dynasty. Built by this dynasty's founder Ta'i si tu Byang chub
rgyal mtshan (1302-64) in 1351, some forty-one years before he was born, Rtsed thang monastery was
located in the immediate vicinity of Sne'u gdong [rtse), the palace and administrative center of Phag mo gru
rule. We can assume that to some degree this institution must have come to rival in importance Gdan sa
mthil (also: thel) or Phag mo gru, the family's older, "ancestral" monastery, if only because of its closer
proximity to the base from which the dynasty projected its political power. Gdan sa mthil (or: thel) was
located to their northeast, across the Gtsang po (Brahmaputra) river, in the 'On valley, and was the traditional
see of the Spyan snga Rin-po-che-s. In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, every one of the Spyan snga
hierarchs, with the exception of Zhwa dmar IV, belonged to the ruling family of Sne'u gdong. Rtsed thang,
too, must have actively participated in the rituals performed for the beneficence of the dynasty's rule in order
to ensure its continuity and success in the face of repeated military conflicts with other Tibetan principalities
in Central Tibet, Dbus and Gtsang. With his biography by Zhwa dmar IV in hand, it now turns out that, like
many another Central Tibetan prelate, 'Gos Lo tsā ba was so closely connected with this family and its
neighboring vassals that he often served in the capacity of what we may call their court chaplain. On account
of them having been teachers to a succession of Phag mo gru rulers, he and his colleague and friend Nam
mkha' blo gros (1403-77) are also on occasion given the title ti shri (< Ch. dishi), "Imperial Preceptor." The
use of this title has of course profound cultural and political implications, but these cannot be discussed here.
His other nickname, Yid bzang rtse pa or Yid bzang rtse pa the Former, is owed in the first place to his
association with Yid bzang rtse. Zhwa dmar IV writes that he left Sne'u gdong for old (rnying pa) Yid bzang
rtse, where he stayed during the winter of 1441-2 and again in 1446 and in the fall of 1447. Although I am
at present not able to locate it with any precision, it may very well have been situated in the neighborhood
of Sne'u gdong and Rtsed thang. Perhaps it was even a temple or hermitage attached to the latter. It is for



The Names of 'Gos Lo tsā ba Gzhon nu dpal
281
this reason that the Las chen begins his brief biography of 'Gos Lo tså ba by calling him as "Yid bzang rtse
pa, the ring lugs of the Victorious One [= Buddha)." His choice of the term ring lugs is hardly accidental
and we can be certain that it was a very conscious act on his part. Fully in the know of historical precedent,
the title means something in the order of "chief abbot," and was first awarded to Sba Ye shes dbang po by
emperor Khri Srong lde btsan (ca. 742-97), Ye shes dbang po was the first Tibetan successor of Şantarakṣita
to the abbacy of Bsam yas, the first Buddhist institution in Tibet to have a contingent of monks. In other
words, the Las chen's point in using this phrase was obviously that he considered 'Gos Lo tsa ba to be the
rightful successor to the Buddha himself, and that he was so anointed by the powers of the Phag mo gru. His
title las chen indicates that he was a mid-level official in their employ. Unlike the powers at Sa skya, who
had ruled over a unitied Central and West Tibet as proxies for the Mongol imperial court in China from circa
1264 to the 1350s, his use of the term ring lugs suggests furthermore that the Phag mo gru wanted to be
perceived and saw themselves as legitimate heirs to the religious legacy and political glory of Tibet's
imperial period, when Tibet was an independent and powerful nation-state. Zhwa dmar IV applies the very
same ring lugs [chen po] to Khrims khang Lo tsā ba.
Some authorities like the Las chen refer to him as "Yid bzang rtse pa the Former" in order to distinguish
him from one of his disciples, Chag Lo tsā ba III alias Yid bzang rtse pa "the Later" (phyi ma). But we must
be cautious here, inasmuch as the historian Dpal bo II employs "Yid bzang rtse pa" for 'Gos Lo tsā ba and
"Yid bzang rtse pa the Later" for none other than Zhwa dmar IV. Skyogs ston Lo tsă ba Rin chen bkra shis
(b. ca. 1500) - one wonders whether he is the same Rin chen bkra shis who was Zhwa dmar IV's scribe for
his biography of 'Gos Lo tså ba - mentions a Yid bzang rtse pa in his 1577 biography of Zhwa lu Lo tsā ba
Chos skyong bzang po (1441-1528) in connection with a corpora of texts his master had studied in Stag lung
monastery in circa 1484-5 under its eleventh abbot Ngag gi dbang phyug grags pa (1418-96). The ones he
stipulates were written by Yid bzang rtse pa, clearly suggest that we have here to do with 'Gos Lo tsā ba.
There is yet an additional reference to Yid bzang rtse pa, in an entry for the year 1488, who must also be
identified with him. The biography of Zhwa lu Lo tsā ba included by A mes zhabs Ngag dbang kun dga'
bsod nams (1597-1659), the great Sa skya pa historian and twenty-eighth abbot of Sa skya monastery, in his
1636 history of the Kālacakra precepts, has here exactly the same passage that we find in Skyogs ston Lo
tsā ba's work. It details the circumstances under which a Sanskrit manuscript of a panjikā-style commentary
on Vasubandhu[ IJ's (ca. 320-80) Abhidharmakośabhāsya - it has the (?Tibetan) nickname Gnam lcags thog
zer (*Karakāśani) - was translated into Tibetan. Attributing it to the Sthiramati of whom some Tibetan
sources say that he had been a student of Vasubandhu (I), they write that it had come in the possession of
the princely scholar Rnam rgyal grags bzang (1395-1475), and that this Lord of Byang principality (byang
bdag) had placed it in the hands of Yid bang rtse pa, most probably for having rendered his services as an
interpreter when Vanaratna (1384-1468) visited his palace in 1453. At an undisclosed time, Yid bzang rtse
pa set about to render it into Tibetan, but ill-health and failing eyes prevented him from finishing it. Later,
they write in 1488, Zhwa lu Lo tsā ba was requested by a Spyan snga Rin po che Bdag nyid chen po to carry
on with the job of translating this long work. Beginning his work in Lhun grub gling in Dol, he completed
it while serving as the Spyan snga's attendant in the southeastern Tibetan area of Kong po.
That this Yid bzang itse pa can only be 'Gos Lo tsā ba is vouchsafed by two thin passages in his
biography, the first of which informs us that, by 1470, he had translated the beginning of Sthiramati's work,
subtitled (Tattvārtha). Two years later, in 1472, he tried to continue where he had left off - he also planned
at this time to translate the Manjusrivyākarama on Sanskrit grammar and to complete what was left to do of
the Vajracchedikā exegesis by a Vasubandhu-, but the conditions of his aged eyes were such that he was
unable to see the tiny letters (vi ge phra ba mi gzigs pa(s) of the manuscripts. This irritated him to no end
(thugs khral yang yang gnang). Zhwa dmar IV related that he asked for some assistance and that, ultimately,
Zhwa lu Lo tsa ba was able to fulfill his intention by finishing his work on these three. The colophon of his
translation of the Tattvārtha in the canon quite clearly describes the role Zhwa dmar IV had played in its
execution, so that we are now in the position to identify the man behing Skyogs ston Lo tsā ba's and A mes
zhabs' "Spyan snga Rin po che Bdag nyid chen po" as none other than Zhwa dmar IV. The epithet was of



282
Leonard W.J. Van Der Kuijp
course informed through the benefit of hindsight, for Zhwa dmar IV occupied the post of the Spyan snga
hierarch of Gdan sa mthil from 1493 to his passing. The colophon begins by stating that the existence of this
commentary was (?first) signaled by Dpang Lo tsa ba Blo gros brtan pa (1276-1342), and that a Sanskrit
manuscript had fallen into the hands of 'Gos Lo tsā ba. Because he was unable to complete the translation,
Zhwa dmar IV decided to fulfill the intention of his erstwhile master, but wondered whether it could be
translated into Tibetan at all. In reply to this query, Zhwa lu Lo tsa ba told him that the manuscript had some
lacunae (hor kong ) which, he was cautiously optimistic, could probably be restored for the most part were
he to compare its readings with those of the available corpus of translations of the Kośa and the Indian
commentaries. Zhwa dmar IV agreed and told him to proceed. Zhwa lu Lo tsā ba compared the actual
Sanskrit manuscript (rgya dpe ngo bo) - this refers to 'Gos Lo tsā ba's manuscript - with the readings of
another manuscript of the text that had come from Stag lung. Called an "Indian Sanskrit manuscript which
is a witness manuscript" (dpe dpang gi rgya dpe), it lacked the text of the final portion of the second, the
entire third and the first portion of the fourth chapter. Using its readings as well as of a Sanskrit manuscript
of Vasubandhu's Bhāsya and the "Tibetan texts [= ?translations of the Bhāsya and other Indian
commentaries) that had been criticized earlier" (sngar smod pa'i bod dpe rnams) to arrive at a workable
rendition, he began his task in Lhun grub gling and Lhun grub lha rtse, and finished it in the Dga' Idan ma
mo temple of Kong po. Zhwa dmar IV first visited Dga' Idan ma mo at the age of eleven, shortly after his
formal recognition as the Zhwa dmar hierarch of the Karma Bkal brgyud pa sect, and became its nominal
abbot not long thereafter. This institution had been founded by Zhwa dmar II Dri med ye shes dpal (1350-
1405) alias Mkha' spyod dbang po in 1386. Though the canonical recension does not say when Zhwa lu Lo
tsä ba completed his task, Dpa bo II dates it to 1490. The colophon is followed by three addenda, the second
of which is a concluding verse of dedication and the third restates the famous ye dharma... formula. I plan
to return to this work and its transmission in Tibetan scholarly circles on a future occasion.
Bibliographic Abbreviations
DPA' - Dpa bo II Gtsug lag phreng ba. Mkhas pa'i dga' ston. Ed. Rdo rje rgyal po. 2 vols. Beijing: Mi rigs
dpe skrun khang, 1986.
LAS - Las chen Kun dga' rgyal mtshan. Bka' gdams kyi rnam par thar pa bka' gdams chos 'byung gsal ba'i
sgron ma, vol. 2. New Delhi, 1972.
SK YOGS - Skyogs ston Lo tsā ba Rin chen bkra shis. Rje btsun zhwa lu lo tsā ba'i rnam par thar pa brjed
byang nor bu'i khri shing [handwritten dbu med manuscript], C.P.N. catalogue no. 002790(9),. Fols. 42.
ZHWA - Zhwa dmar IV Chos grags ye shes. Dpal Idan bla ma dam pa mkhan chen thams cad mkhyen pa
don gyi slad du mtshan nas smos te gzhon nu dpal gyi rnam par thar pa yon tan rin po che mchog tu
rgyas pa'i ljon pa [handwritten dbu can manuscript], C.P.N. catalogue no. 003259(11). Fols. 74.
ZHWAI - Ibid. Rje brsun thams cad mkhyen pa lo tsā ba chen po'i rnam par thar pa ngo mtshar rgya mtsho
[handwritten dbu can manuscript], C.P.N.catalogue no. 003265(5). Fols. 130.
Notes
* This paper incorporates some of the results obtained during my stay in Beijing from October to December of 1992
and from July to September of 1993 that was made possible by a generous grant from what was then the Committee
on Scholarly Communication with the People's Republic of China, Washington, D.C. There I mainly worked in the
China Nationalities Library of the Cultural Palace of Nationalities. The manuscripts of texts used for this paper that
were housed in the latter are marked "C.P.N."; those that were filmed by the Nepal-German Manuscript
Preservation Project in Nepal are marked "N.G.M.P.P."
1. See ZHWA. The earliest summary of 'Gos Lo tsa ba's life is so far found in his disciple the Las chen Kun dga' rgyal
mtshan's 1494 chronicle of the Bka' gdams pa school in L.AS2, 1-10. An edition of ZHWA by Ngag dbang nor bu
was recently published as Gos lo gzhon nu dpal gvi mnam thar (Beijing: Mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 2004).
2. What follows is taken from ZHWAI, 128a ft. This work is also as yet unpublished. All dates in this paper are
calculated with the aid of the Tabellen in D. Schuh's Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der tibetischen



The Names of 'Gos Lo tsā ba Gzhon nu dpal
283
Kalenderrechnung, Verzeichnis der Orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland, Supplement Bd. 16 (Wiesbaden:
Franz Steiner Verlag, 1973).
3. He was also the author of a catalogue of his master's writings and translations, for which see the nine-folio
handwritten dbu med manuscript of the Rje btsun lo tsā ba chen po'i bka' 'bum dang 'gur 'bum phyogs gcig fu
bzhugs pa ji snyed pa'i dkar chag utpa la'i phreng ba, C.P.N. catalogue no. 004401(1). He occurs once in ZHWA1,
74b. Apparently a native of Snadkar rtse, we find three letters addressed to Snadkar rtse Byams pa kun dga' among
Khrims khang Lo tsā ba's letters in the Yongs 'dzin dam pa mnams kyi drung du phul ba'i zhu yig dang/zhal slob
sbyin bdag dang bcas pa rnams la chos skyes su stsal ba'i bka' yig phreng ba kun khyab snyan pa'i ba dan,
N.G.M.P.P., Reel no. AT 111/2, 310b-1b. This fascinating epistolary collection was first noted by its discovered F.-
K. Ehrhard in his "The Tibetan Section of the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project (NGMPP) in the Year
1991: Actual Achievements and Future Prospects," Abhilekh 10 (1992), 84.
4. A tentative and incomplete listing of his translations and revisions of earlier translations is given in M. Hahn, "Das
Vanaratnastotra des Aditya*, " Suhrllekhāh. Festgabe für Helmut Eimer, ed. M. Hahn et al., Indica et Tibetica, Bd.
28 (Swisttal-Odendorf: Indica et Tibetica Verlag, 1996), 30-1.
5. If memory serves me well, it is listed among the reels of tibetica of texts filmed by the NGM.P.P., but I naturally
stand to be corrected.
6. I am preparing a facsimile reproduction of the first which, together with a long introduction, will be published by
the Lumbini International Research Institute, directed by C. Cueppers. The second work is registered under C.P.N.
catalogue no. 006770(1), and was recently reprinted in Skar nag rtsis kyi lo rgyus skor, Bod ki rtsis rig kunt dus
chen mo, vol. 1, (Chengdu: Si khrom mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 1998), 298-327. This work is alluded to in ZHWA,
366, 67b.
7. ZHWA, 69b, states that he finished it on the fifteenth day of the eighth month (6 September, 1473), but in his
introduction to the Deb ther sngon po, ed. Dung dkar Blo bzang 'phrin las, vol 1 (Chengdu: Si khron mi rigs dpe
skrun khang, 1984), *4, Dung dkar Rin po che maintains that he wrote it in 1468. A handwritten dbu med
manuscript of this long work was also filmed by the N.G.M.P.P., and the edition will be published in the series
Publications of the Nepal Research Centre. It is also mentioned in ZHWA, 20a, and 73b.
8. On the same page of his introduction as in note 7, Dung dkar Rin po che states that he completed it towards the end
of 1476 on the basis of one or both sources he used for his synopsis of 'Gos Lo tsā ba's life. There are a seventy-
three folio biography by his own disciple titled Thams cad mkhyen pa gzhon nu dpal gvi mnam par thar pa and Chag
Lo tsā ba III Rin chen chos kyi rgyal po's (1447-?) Dus 'khor chos 'byung dpag bsam snye ma. Chag Lo tsā ba III
was the abbot of Lte'u ra, his own ancestral monastery, and a student of 'Gos Lo tsa ba as well. The first belonged
to the holdings of the C.P.N. and is most probably nothing other than the biography by Zhwa dmar IV. However,
the second of but two entries in which he expressly mentions the chronicle, ZHWA, 46 and 71b, states that he
wrote it in 1478. For the other work, a history of the transmissions of the Kalacakra, Dung dkar Rin po che used
an unpublished manuscript that belonged to the library of Sa skya monastery's Lha khang chen mo. I have seen a
sixteenth century blockprint of Chag Lo tsā ba III's work in the library of the Tibetan Archives, Lhasa. Some Tibetan
sources, such as Dngos grub rgya mtsho's early seventeenth century treatise on the study of linguistics in Tibet, call
him Chag Lo tsā ba IV; see the Tha snyad rig gnas Inga ji Itar byung ba'i fshul gsal bar byed pa blo gsal mgrin
rgyan legs bshad nor bu'i phreng ba, ed. Nor brang Orgyan, Gangs can rig mdzod, 4 (Lhasa: Bod ljongs mi dmangs
dpe skrun khang, 1987), 309. But this seems to be an oversight, for the Karma Bka' brgyud pa historian Dpa' bo II
Gtsug lag phreng ba (1504-66) consistently refers to him as Chag Lo tsă ba III, for which see DPA'I, 505 and
DPA 2, 1501.
9. See, respectively, The Blue Annals (New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1979) and Qingshi (Lhasa: Xizang renmin
chubanshe, 1985). For some aspects of this work, see my "On the Composition and Printings of the Deb gter (or:
ther) sngon po by Gos Lo tsă ba Gzhon nu dpal (1392-1481)", which is forthcoming in the Journal of the
International Association of Tibetan Studies 2 (2006).
10. See the Rje brsun thams cad mkhyen pa bshes gyven shakya rgyal mtshan gvi rnam thar ngo mtshar dad pa'i rol
mtsho, Collected Works, vol 16 (Thimphu, 1975), 336. See also D. P. Jackson's Introduction to Rong ston on the
Prajñāpāramita Philosophy of the Abhisamavālamkara, ed. D. P. Jackson and Onoda Shunzo, Biblia Tibetica, 2
(Kyoto: Nagata Bunshoso, 1988), VII. ZHWA, 166, 20a, 52b, makes it quite clear that he studied with Ron ston
during the years 1419 and 1424.
11. See his Chos kyi rje kun dga' rdo rje'i rman par thar pa dad pali stobs bskyed pa, Collected Works, vol. 16
(Thimphu, 1975), 413, and the Chos kyi 'khor lo bskor ba'i rnam gahag ji ltar grub pa'i vi ge gzu bor gras pa'i
mdzangs pa dga' byed, Collected Works, vol. 16 (Thimphu, 1975), 476.



284
Leonard W.J. Van Der Kuijp
12. For a few notes on this monastery, see my "On the Fifteenth Century Lho rong chos 'yung by Rta tshag Tshe dbang
rgyal and Its Importance for Tibetan and Religious History," Aspects of Tibetan History, Lungta 14, Spring 2001,
ed. R. Vitali (Dharamsala, India: Amnye Machen Institute), 57-76.
13.DPA 2, 1121. Neither the Las chen nor Zhwa dmar IV use this title for him.
14. ZHWA, 336, 58, 59, 60a.
15. LAS2, 1. In Las2, 502 ff., the Las chen refers to him as Yid bzang rtse pa as the source for his information on several
students of Tsong kha pa Blo bzang grags pa (1357-1419), with whom he had briefly studied in Bkra shis do kha,
in 1415; see ZHWA, 9b-10a.
16. On this expression, see lastly Chen Jianjian (=Bsod nams skyid], "Ring lugs zhes pa'i tha snyad kyi go don 'gyur
tshul la rags tsam dpyad pa," Tibetan Studies, Proceedings of the 6th Seminar of the International Association for
Buddhist Studies, Fagernes 1992, vol. 2, ed. P. Kvaerne (Oslo: The Institute for Comparative Research in Human
Culture, 1994), 781-8, and its Chinese version in Zhongguo Zangxue 3 (1991), 134-40.
17. ZHWA1, 130b.
18. LAS2, 10.
19. DPA', 1122-4. DPA 2, 1125 refers to 'Gos Lo tsa ba as rje 'gos, "Lord 'Gos."
20. SKYOGS, 216, where he refers to a series of notes (zin bris) the Stag lung hierarch had made of Yid bzang rtse pa's
lectures on the Uttaratantra and the Bodhicāryāvatāra, as well as to Yid bzang rtse pa's commentaries on the Do
ha [b]skor gsum and the Dmangs do ha. ZHWA, 67a, observed that he wrote a study of the ninth chapter of the
Bodhicäryävatāra in 1465 at the behest of the Stag lung hierarch.
21. SK YOGS, 22b. The passage occurs partly in the text proper and partly in a corrective editorial note in the bottom
margin, written in small dou can characters. The passage is found "whole" on fol. 27a of another du med
manuscript of the text as per C.P.N. catalogue no. 002772(12).
22. See the Dpal dus kyi 'khor lo'i zab pa dang rgya che ba'i dam pa'i chos 'byung ba' tshul legs par bshad pa ngo
mtshar dad pa'i shing rta [handwritten dbu med manuscript), Collected Works, vol. Pa, C.P.N. catalogue no.
003204, 145a. A mes zhabs' biography of Zhwa lu Lo tsă ba extends from fols. 126a-70a. At the end, he says that
he summarized the earlier study of Zhwa lu Lo tså ba's life by Pan chen "Bum phrag gsum pa, subtitled Dad pa'i
jug ngogs, to which he added further details from Skyogs ston Lo tsa ba's work. Of the prima facie three possible
Tibetan candidates who are nicknamed "[Pan chen) 'Bum phrag gsum pa" - see my "Fourteenth Century Tibetan
Cultural History VI: The Transmission of Indian Buddhist Pramānavāda according to Early Tibetan Gsan yig-s,"
Asiatische Studien / Etudes Asiatiques XLIX (1995), 926-7, n. 20 - the one in question is no doubt Pan chen Rin
chen chos kyi dbang po (16th cent.). SKYOGS, 42a-b states that he was the Chu [?Chos] sgo ba of Gdan sa mthil.
23. Writing at the end of 1167 or the beginning of 1168, already the Sa skya pa scholar Slob dpon Bsod nams rtse mo
(1142-82), distinguishes between Vasubandhu as a Gnas brtan (*Sthavira) and Vasubandhu as a Yogacärin in his
Chos la 'jug pali sgo, Sa skya pa'i bka' 'bum, vol. 2, comp. Bsod nams rgya mtsho (Tokyo: The Toyo Bunko, 1968),
no. 17, 342/4. He stipulates that Sthiramati was a disciple of the latter. For the two Vasubandhus, see L.
Schmithausen, Alayavijñāna. On the Origin and the Early Development of a Central Concept of Yogācāra
Philosophy, part 2 (Tokyo: The International Institute for Buddhist Studies, 1987), 262-3, n. 101, and M. Mejor,
Vasubandhu's Abhidharmakosa and the Commentaries Preserved in the Tanjur, Alt- und Neu-indische Studien, Bd.
42 (Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1991), 42-9.
24. For this, see the very brief note in 'Gos Lo tsā ba's biography of Vanaratna, the Mkhas pa chen po dpal nags kyi rin
chen gyi rnam par thar pa (Thimphu: National Library of Bhutan, 1985), 47 (= Khrims khang Lo tsa ba's Chos kyi
rje pan chen nags kyi rin po che'i zhal snga nas kyi rnam par thar pa, handwritten dbu med manuscript, C.P.N.
catalogue no. 002779(9), 20b). Both are undated, but the latter includes the author's eyewitness report of Vanaratna's
passing in the Kathmandu Valley. Unfortunately, both ZHWA, 36a, and Jo nang Kun dga' grol mchog's (1507-66)
biography of Rnam rgyal grags bzang, the Rigs ldan chos kyi rgyal po rnam rgyal grags pa bzang po'i rnam par
thar pa rab bsngags snyan pa'i 'brug sgra [Ngam ring xylograph), C.P.N. catalogue no. 002751(8), 20a, are equally
laconic about what transpired during their visit there.
25. ZHWA, 455, 46a.
26. For the first, see P. C. Verhagen, A History of Sanskrit Grammatical Literature in Tibet, Volume One. Transmission
of the Canonical Literature (Leiden: EJ Brill, 1994), 126-8, 199-200, 300-4. The Lo tså ba Dpal Idan grags pa
mentioned in the colophon as having petitioned Zhwa lu Lo tså ba to shoulder the task of translating this text on
Sanskrit grammar, must be the same individual who is also known as Sne shangs or Glo bo Lo tså ba Dpal Idan
grags pa. He was therefore a native of what is now Nepal. For the second, see the remarks in G. Tucci, Minor
Buddhist Texts, part 1, Serie Orientale Roma, IX, 1 (Roma: Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente, 1959),



The Names of 'Gos Lo tsā ba Gzhon nu dpal
285
16-8, who judges that "in many places the Sanskrit original has been completely misunderstood." This work was
presumably written by Vasubandhu II (ca. 400-480).
27. What follows is based on the text in The Tibetan Tripitaka, Taipet - Sde dge] Edition, ed. A. W. Barber (Taipei:
SMC Publishing Inc., 1991), vol. 53, no. 4428 [#4421), 111/2-3 [Do, 386b-7a).
28. This colophon is also discussed in M. Mejor, Vasubandhu's Abhidharmakośa and the Commentaries Preserved in
the Tanjur, 94. He takes the admittedly very unusual term dpe dpang to mean an "Indian manuscript of Dpang Lo
tsā ba" in the sense that dpe dpang -*dpang gi dpe. I suspect this is not what is intended by dpe dpang, the more
so since the ways in which the colophons of canonical translations and the Tibetan commentaries indicate the
provenance of Sanskrit manuscripts are as a rule much more explicit.
29. My conjecture is in part based on the last great Tibetan Sanskritist Si tu Pan chen Chos kyi 'byung gnas' (1700-74)
use of the expression rang 'grel bod dpe rnams, "Tibetan manuscripts of the [Bhasya) autocommentary," in his
unfinished Abhidharmakośa commentary, for which see the Chos mngon pa mdzod kvitshig don ram par 'grel pa
brgya byin thog pa'i nor bu'i 'od snang, Collected Works, vol. 13 (Sansal: Shesrabling Institute of Buddhist Studies,
1990), 17. Si tu Pan chen had access to a Sanskrit manuscript of Sthiramati's commentary and occasionally directly
quotes from it.
30.DPA 2, 1134.
31. On this formula, see most recently Tsering Gyalbo, G Hazod and P. Sørensen, Civilization at the Foot of Mount
Sham-po. The Royal House of Lha Bug-pa-can and the History of Gya-bzang (Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2000), 103-4, n. 311.



HISTORIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL ON EARLY SKYID-GRONG
(GATHERED FROM LOCAL DOCUMENTS AND
BKA'-BRGYUD-PA SOURCES)*
Roberto Vitali
(Dharamsala-Kathmandu)
Sources
The historiography of skyid-grong valley has more often been characterised by its sacred image than by its
people, for the sandalwood statue of 'Phags-pa Wa-ti bzang-po, an object of devotion traditionally
considered only second to the Jo-bo of Ra-sa 'Phrul-snang, has deservedly commanded the attention of
Tibetan authors.
This article does not attempt even a partial history of 'Phags-pa Wa-ti bzang-po, although a few
references will be made to sKyid-grong's most famous statue, for this task has been very competently
undertaken in the recent past by Franz-Karl Ehrhard in his monumental work Die Statue und der Tempel des
Arya Va-ti Bzang-po - Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte und Geographie des Tibetischen Buddhismus, Hamburg
1998.
My contribution concerns the history of two noble families of skyid-grong whose activities influenced
the religious and secular events of this land, and the interaction of their members with a few great religious
masters of various periods.
Consequently, the approach adopted in this article has been to assemble elements of early sKyid-grong-
pa historiography internally, i.e. from local material which directly concerns sKyid-grong and its people,
rather than externally, i.e. from references to sKyid-grong extracted from literary sources on religious
masters and lay people who went to visit Phags-pa Wa-ti bzang-po.
The present work in fact covers events in the history of Kyid-grong from the second quarter of the 7th
century until iron rat 1240. In other words, I begin with the episode of the one hundred or five hundred
monks from sKyid-grong, who were Srong-btsan sgam-po's officiating bla-ma, and end with the great Sa-
skya pandi-ta Kun-dga' rgyal-mtshan's (1182-1251) visit to Jo-bo 'Phags-pa Wa-ti and his defeat of the
Brahmanists there.
In trying to shed some (albeit faint) light on a place as important as sKyid-grong, I have relied on a
limited number of documents. These are the mes-rabs in the biographies of some local bla-ma and gdung-
rabs of families from sKyid-grong. One source, entitled rTen-gsum gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag and written by
Blo-gros chos-'phel (1665-1727?), is local and amounts to a gdung-rabs of the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa, one of
the two families I wish to concentrate on, to which the author belonged. Despite its anomalous title,
* I am honoured to dedicate to Gene Smith this small token of reverence. He must be credited with ferrying Tibetan
studies away from the elitism of the past. He has unlocked the sbas-yul of Tibetan literature for the benefit of all
those who care. His proverbial generosity has matched Tibetan willingness to share their culture. In the process,
many literary treasures were spared a grim fate. bka'-drin-che, Gene!
Some time ago, when I had already decided to contribute a work on the historiography of syid-grong for this
volume, it was a sheer coincidence that he sent to me an electronic copy of the same Dehradun edition of 'Ba'-ra
bka'-brgyud ser-phreng used here, without being informed that I was putting together the present work. Among his
many virtues, Gene Smith is also mngon-shes-can!
1. I wish to thank Tashi Tsering for giving me Byums-pa phun-tshogs-kyi mnam-thar on the Byang-chub gling-pa and
rTen-gsum gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag on the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa. In the past, we had discussed the significance of some
parts of the biographies of bla-ma from 'Ba'ru bka'-brgyud-pa ser-phreng in reference to my research on the
history of mNgaris skor-gsum. I ended up using these rnam-thar for the present work on Kyid-grong because their
scope is somewhat limited for the history of mNga'-ris skor-gsum but definitely important for that of skyid-grong.



Historiographical Material on Early sKyid-grong
287
indicating it only as a dkar-chag (of their 'Jam-dpal-gling temple in Kyid-grong), it is also a gdung-rabs.
In fact the dkar chag is appended as the final section to the family's gdung-rabs.
Other documents on the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa concern two masters of the "Ba'-ra bka'-brgyud-pa
tradition and, in particular, important material is found in the mes-rabs of their biographies contained in
'Ba'-ra bka'-brgyud bla-ma'i ser-phreng. They are respectively Blo-gros chos-'phel-gyi mam-thar
(dedicated to the life of the author of rTen-gsum gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag) and Ngag-dhang ye-shes-kyi
rnam-thar both by Chos-dbyings rdo-rje (1772-1838).
rTen-gsum gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag is the main text used here, and my treatment of the 'Jam-dpal gling-
pa is based on it not so much because it is the earliest text of them but because it has the sharpest and most
reliable account of the family's history. In some cases, the other sources introduce variant versions of the
accounts (Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi rnam-thar, especially, adds several details which are missing elsewhere),
and are used here to complement the treatment of the dkar-chag.
Another significant mes-rabs is the one opening the biography of Byams-pa phun-tshogs (a bla-ma
from sKyid-grong renowned for his xylograph editions in Gung-thang). The mes-rabs of Byams-pa phun-
tshogs-kyi rnam-thar recounts the lives of the Byang-chub gling-pa of Kyid-grong, the other family on
which I wish to concentrate. It is the only text available to me for this assessment.
Finally, I have used 'Phags-pa Wa-ti'i rnam-thar by Maitri-ba-dzra only marginally, for some specific
historical notions. Although it contains significant and interesting material, this work mainly concerns the
'Phags-pa Wa-ti bzang-po statue, which is not the subject of the present work. Hence, the texts used in what
follows can be classified into local documents and sources belonging to the bka'-brgyud-pa tradition.
Noble families of Kyid-grong during the imperial period: the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa and the
Byang-chub gling-pa
The 'Jam-dpal gling-pa and the Byang-chub gling-pa families, whose history is the history of sKyid-grong
itself, settled in Grwa and gNas respectively. Both of these places are at a very short distance from the centre
of sKyid-grong where the temple of 'Phags-pa Wa-ti is situated and thus are in the vicinity of the locality
commonly named skyid-grong-thil in antiquity (whereas the skyid-grong-rdzong of more recent times
refers to a wider area). Grwa is to the cast of Kyid-grong; gNas is to the north-east.
Grwa, the residence of the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa family, is the more ancient of the two. The first
documented reference to it occurs during the reign of Srong-btsan sgam-po (617-650). This is also the
earliest reference to sKyid-grong, which must have already been established by then.
A legend associates the name of the ancestral site Grwa to the fact that the one hundred or five hundred
monks (grwa-pa, hence the place name Grwa), who became the bla-mchod of Srong-btsan sgam-po, were
from this locality. In which of Srong-btsan sgam -po's twenty-two regnal years (629-650) this happened is
not specified in the material available to me. However, "Phags-pa Wa-ti'i rnam-thar says that, when 'Phags-
pa Wa-ti was brought to sKyid-grong, a water channel was arranged to provide for Srong-btsan sgam-po's
2. Another biography of Blo-gros chos-'phel entitled dPal-ldan bla-ma dam-pa Blo-gros chos-'phel-gvi rnam-thar
rin-po-che baidu-rya 'od-snang written by 'Ba-ra ba Ngag-dbang ye-shes (in bka-brgyud ser-phreng chen-mo,
vol. III, p. 234-271) has a mes-rabs section which is more succinct than those of the other two rnam-thar cited in
the present work and without additional or differing information. Therefore, it is not used here.
3. The name skyid-grong seems to be an abridgement of syid-mi grong-bdun ("the seven villages of happy people"),
as often the locality is called in extenso (e.g. 'Phags-pa Wa-ti'i mnam-thar, f. 16a,2 and Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi
mam-thar p. 400,1), and also of sKyid-pa'i grong-khyer ("the town of happy people") (e.g. Byams-pa phun-tshogs-
kyi rnam-thar, f. 2b,2).
4. The sources vary on their number, Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi rnam-thar (see n. 5) is in favour of the former, whereas
'Phags-pa Wa-ti'i rnam-thar (see n. 7) is for the latter.
5. Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kvi rnam-thar (p. 397 lines 4-5): "During the time of the incarnate chos-rgyal Srong-btsan
sgam-po, here (in Kyid-grong) some one hundred gra-pa were established as bla-mchod ("officiating bla-ma") (of
this king), hence this place was called Gra".



288
Roberto Vitali
bla-mchod, showing that the appointment of the Grwa-pa monks was practically contemporaneous with the
construction of the temple built to house the self-originated sandalwood statue. When taken to the border of
Tibet, the statue spoke and refused to be brought farther, hence, a temple was built there to house it. The
same dkar-chag claims that the name given to the sandalwood image was derived from the existence of the
water channel (wa-ti) in the vicinity of the temple.?
'Phags-pa Wa-ti'i rnam-thar dates the foundation of Wa-ti'i lha-khang to the year of the snake 645.8
This date lends credibility to the account of the appointment of the monks from Grwa as Srong-btsan sgam-
po's bla-mchod, and places this event in the period after the major feats of his reign (the conquests of Sum-
pa, Gya, 'A-zha, Sechuan and Zhang-zhung, as well as the construction of Ra-sa Phrul-snang) had been
accomplished.
The ancestors of the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa family provided ministers to the kingdom during the reign of
several lha-sras btsan-po. The indication of their names in the sources makes it clear that the 'Jam-dpal
gling-pa of skyid-grong belonged to the mGos clan. Some of their ministers also were among the most
distinguished supporters of Buddhism.
The sources say, with a rather shaky chronology, that, during the period of the religious kings of Yar-
lung which began with Srong-btsan sgam-po, five generations of mGos clan members (sTag-ri gung-btsan,
*Brug-sgra rdo-rje, Ha-bzang yab-lhag (also known as Khri-bzang yab-lhag), 1Hun-grub-'bar and Padma
gung-btsan) resided in dBus.
The chronological sequence of these ministers is not established and it is not easy to assign them to the
reign of one or several lha-sras bisan-po. Khri-bzang yab-lhag belonged to the third generation of the mGos
clan in dBus. He was a minister of Khri-srong Ide-btsan, but also served Khri Ral-pa-can in his old age, and
6. Wa-ti'i lha-khang was not the only temple in Kyid-grong which the sources credit to Srong-btsan sgam-po. In the
well known classifications of the network of temples in order to suppress the srin-mo gan-rkyal and finally to
accomplish the construction of Ra sa 'Phrul-snang, which the literature attributes to this king, there is Mang-yul
Byang-sprin (also known as Byams-sprin). This temple is normally included among the yang-dul gtsug-lag-khang
and was built to pin down the left sole of the srin-mo's foot. What is less well known is that other temples were
built in Mang-yul as part of the scheme. They appear in the expanded classifications of the scheme contained in
Nyang-ral chos-'byung (p. 242 line 19-p. 244 line 6), IDe'u Jo-sras chos-'byung (p. 115 line 15-p. 117 line 7).
mkhas-pa IDe'u chos-"byung (p. 284 line 19-p. 286 line 20) and sNgon-gyi me-tog-gi phreng-ba (p. 16 line 14-p.
19 line 15) (see my forthcoming work, "The narrative of Srong, btsan sgam.po subduing the demoness: A study of
its scheme and historical implications"). The same texts add a branch temple of Byang-sprin, known as s Tang-sprin,
which may have been in Mang-yul, but this is not sure. Another temple belonging to an expanded classification of
the mtha'- 'dul gtsug-lag-khang is sBang-chen brtsegs-pa, which the sources unanimously place in Mang-yul.
7. 'Phags-pa Wa-ti'i rnam-thar (f. 14b line 7-f. 15a line 2): "Since the gisug-lag-khang at sKyid-grong had been
founded, [the statue of 'Phags-pa Wa-ti] stayed [here). At that time, this area having plentiful meadows and water
springs everywhere, a wa-ti ("water channel") was made. (f. 15a) This was sufficient water to prepare tea for the
monks who were the bla-mchod of the king. It is said that this was a blessing of Jo-bo. Since this was in accordance
with the earlier words of 'Jama-li, it became known as 'Phags-pa Wa-ti bzang-po".
8. 'Phags-pa Wa-ti'i rnam-thar (f. 18b line 4) reads: "878 [years) elapsed between the arrival of the self-originated
Phags-pa in Ma-yul (spelled as) (i.e. in 645) and the present water horse year (1522)". Nga-'gyur rnying-ma'i
brjod-pa (p. 35 lines 1-2)(bSod-nams don-grub, Nga-gyur rnying-ma'i byung-ba mdo-tsam brjod-pa padma ra-
ga'i do-shal gzhon-nu dgyes-pa'i mgul-rgyan zhes-bya-ba bzhugs-so, Ngag-dbang phun-tshogs ed., Mi-rigs dpe-
skrun-khang, Beijing 1991) has a different opinion: "When (Srong-btsan sgam-po) was fifteen years old (631), dge-
slong A-kara-ma-ti-shi-la brought the self-originated 'Phags-pa".
9. rTen-gsum gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag (f. 3a lines 3-5): "The people inhabiting the Land of Snows have many clans
known as mi'u gdong-drug (sic for gdung-drug). However, we (i.e. the mGos) anciently originated from the lha.
Not long after descending to the country of Tibet, beginning with Tag-ri gung-btsan, [and then] 'Brug-sgra rdo-rje,
IHa-bzang yab-Ihag and IHun-grub-'bar were the religious ministers (chos-blon) of the mnga'-bdag mes-dbon. It is
well known that, until the fifth generation, [that of the religious minister bde-blon (hde-srung blon-po "security
minister", i.e. Padma gung-btsan), they lived in dBus of Tibet".



Historiographical Material on Early skyid-grong
289
died before gNas-mying was founded by rGya 'Jam-dpal gsang-ba sometime between 821-822 and 836.0
According to a note in Myang chos-'byung, Khri-bzang yab-lhag was the grandfather of Padma gung-
btsan," which would place the activity of the latter mGos minister during the reign of 'Od-srung and
possibly dPal-'khor-btsan.12
On the other hand, the notion in gNas-rying skyes-bu mnams-kyi rnam-mthar that Khri-bzang yab-lhag
died when he was aged sixty-seven (see n. 10) would put his birth in the fifties or sixties of the 8th century
and this would make him a younger contemporary of Khri-srong Ide-btsan, for whom he built temples. Two
generations of ministers belonging to the m os family, the ancestors of the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa of skyid-
grong, before the time of Khri-srong Ide-btsan would not necessarily make sTag-ri gung-btsan a
contemporary of Srong-btsan sgam-po, given that four generations of kings divided Srong-btsan sgam-po
from Khri-srong Ide-btsan (Gung-srong gung-btsan, Mang-srong mang-btsan, 'Dus-srong mang-po-rje and
Khri-lde gtsug-brtan). But these are slippery grounds because calculations by mi-rabs ("generations") are
never too accurate, and this is no more than a suggestion which needs sound corroboration.
Moreover, it is not clear whether sTag-ri gung-btsan and 'Brug-sgra rdo-rje were father and son. If not,
their lifetimes could have covered the reigns of those kings, especially since Gung-srong gung-btsan died in
infancy. But the reason to believe that sTag-ri gung-btsan, the earliest of the five mGos ministers, lived
during Srong-btsan sgam-po's time is that the sources associate his existence with that of chos-rgyal mes-
Blo-gros chos-'phel-gvi rnam-thar (p. 283 lines 2-3): “During the times of the chos-rgyal me-dbon, beginning with
bka'i blon-po 'Gos sTag-ri gung-btsan, and then] 'Brug-sgra rdo-rje, Khri-bzang yab-lhag, IHun-grub-'bar until
the chos-blon (i.e Padma gung-btsan), five generations lived in dBus".
Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi rnam-thar (p. 397 line 5-p. 398 line 1) reads: "It is believed that this lineage originally
descended from the lha. During the times of the chos-rgyal mes-dbon, beginning with bka'i blon-po 'Gos sTag-ri
gung-btsan, and then] 'Brug-sgra rdo-rje, Khri-bzang yab-lhag, and lHun-grub-'bar, five generations (of the mGos
family members) stayed in dBus until the religious minister (chos-blon) ge-byon (sic for bde-blon or bde-srung
blon-po), said to have been Padma gung-btsan, who was the son's son (bus-bu) of this blon-po Khri-bzang yab-lhag
(p. 398). The latter was the nang-blon of chos-rgyal Khri-srong Ide-btsan".
10. gNas-rnying skyes-bu rnams-kyi mam-thar (f. 4a lines 2-3): "Hence, the bla-ma (i.e. Gya 'Jam-dpal gsang-ba) and
mGos Khyung-rgod-rtsal went to this place where blon-po mGos (lHa-bzang yab-lhag] resided. ['Jam-dpal gsang-
ba) gave him many teachings. He spent three years here. Blon-po chen-po died when he was sixty-seven”. For the
assessment of the period in which gNas-mying was founded, see my paper "The history of the lineages of gNas
mying summarized as its "ten greatnesses" in the sources (a survey of the period from the second half of the 8th
century to the beginning of the Sa skya pa rule)", in H. Blezer, Tibet Past and Present, vol. 1, Proceedings of the
8th Seminar of the International Association for Tibetan Studies, Leiden 2000, Brill, Leiden 2002.
11. Myang chos-'byung (p. 77 lines 8-14): "In antiquity, m os Khri-bzang yab-lhag (was) the nang-blon chen-po of
Khri-song Ide'u-btsan (note: one is requested to investigate (whether] this was 'Gos Padma gung-btsan. In antiquity,
"Gos Khri-bzang, also known as 'Gos Khri-'bring khang-bzang, the great nang-blon of king Khri-srong Ide'u-btsan,
being the father, the son of this chos-blon ("religious minister") was known as 'Gos-kyi Padma gung-btsan. He was
a minister. He was 'Gos Padma gung-btsan. Moreover, 'Gos Khri-bzang yab-lhag was the grandfather of 'Gos-kyi
Padma gung-btsan and the father of Khri-'bring khang-bzang)". There is a major discrepancy with gNas-rying
skyes-bu rnams-kyi mnam-thar (f. 3b lines 3-4) for the latter source says that m os Khri-bzang yab-lhag's sons were
mGos Khyung-rgod-rtsal and Do-rje-rtsal.
12. The period in which Padma gung-btsan lived is disputed in the sources and this is probably the reason that led the
anonymous author(s) of Myang chos-'byung to add a note on the relation of kinship between 'Gos Khri-bzang yab-
Ihag and Padma gung-btsan. For instance dPa'-bo includes Padma gung-btsan among the Buddhist ministers of
Khri-srong Ide-btsan (mKhas-pa'i dga'-ston p. 303 line 8) (dPa'-bo g Tsug-lag phreng-ba, Dam-pa chos-kyi 'khor-
lo bsgyur-barnams-kvi byung-ba gsal-bar byed-pa mkhas-pa'i dga'-ston, Do-rje rgyal-po ed., Mi-rigs dpe-skrun-
khang, Beijing 1986). On the contrary, 'Gos Khri-bzang yab-lhag is profusely quoted in Ba-bzhed as the minister
of Khri-srong Ide-btsan, whereas Padma gung-btsan is absent from the latter text. These considerations plus the note
on the genealogy of the 'Gos in Myang chos-'byung cited above (see n. 11) have led me to assess mGos Padma
gung-btsan to a period after the reign of Khri-srong Ide-btsan.



290
R
oberto Vitali
dbon rnam-gsum, and since they also document that he was not active during the reign of Khri-srong Ide-
btsan (the second religious king), he must have been a contemporary of Srong-btsan sgam-po."
Since the time of the one hundred or five hundred Grwa-pa bla-mchod of Srong-btsan sgam-po, sKyid-
grong became a stronghold of Buddhism and, in some remarkable cases, a sanctuary for Dam-pa'i Chos
when it experienced difficult times in the land of Tibet. The persecution of Buddhism which occurred at the
end of Khri-lde gtsug-brtan Mes Ag-tshom's life was one of them. As is well known, after this king was
assassinated in the year of the sheep 755 (the prosecution of his murderers is recorded in the entry for this
year in the Tun-huang Annals), Buddhism suffered a setback under a new law, defined as khrims-bu-chung
in the sources. The great Jo-bo of Ra-sa 'Phrul-snang, which is said to have been taken to this temple from
Ra-mo-che by the Chinese princess Kong-jo, was hurriedly taken away from Ha-sa to avoid worse
consequences.16
Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi rnam-thar fixes at fourteen the number of years during which the statue
remained in sKyid-grong before being taken back to lHa-sa." It thus seems more or less to correspond with
the intervening period before the restoration of Buddhism accomplished by the young Khri-srong Ide-btsan.
Hence, it seems that sKyid-grong did not suffer the political and religious tensions that troubled the
central regions of Bod. If the building of bSam-yas marked the beginning of the reintroduction of Buddhism
which led to the establishment of bstan-pa snga-dar, the relatively calm situation in skyid-grong seemingly
favoured Buddhist activities before the construction of bSam-yas in dBus. Ba gSal-snang writes somewhat
autobiographically in s Ba-bzhed that when Bo-dhi-sa-twa was invited (by him) to Mang-yul, they built two
gistig-lag-khang locally.18
In accordance with a system documented both in the ancient material and later sources, religious
exponents of families who had served the lha-sras btsan-po were rewarded with an appointment as bla-ma
of territories granted to them and their successors in perpetuity. This as also the case with a little known
bla-mchod of Khri-srong Ide-btsan called Thar-pa shes-rab and belonging to the Khang family (which was
to become the Byang-chub gling-pa) from sKyid-grong. He was appointed to the same office in Kyid-grong
13. The mGos family remained in dBus for another two generations after mGos Khri-bzang yab-ihag was transferred
to Myang-stod to reside in the area of gNas-mying. Thus, the transfer of the mGos did not pertain to the entire clan
of dBus. This seems to be confirmed by the fact that iHun-grub-'bar, the member of the next mGos generation
residing in dBus according to rTen-gsum gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag, Blo-gros chos- phel-gyi mnam-thar and Ngag-
dbang ye-shes-kyi rnam-thar, is not included among the scions of Khri-bzang yab-Ihag by the sources dealing with
gNas-rnying, thus possibly indicating that only a fraction of the m os of dBus moved to Myang-stod. This is also
the case with Khri-'bring khang-bzang, who is indicated as Khri-bzang yab-lhag's son according to the note in
Myang chos-'byung mentioned above.
14. See Tun-huang Annals (lines 12-16) (in Tun-hong nas thon-pa'i Bod-kyi lo-rgyus yig-cha, p. 30) (Tun-hong-nas
thon-pa i Bod-kyi lo-rgyus yig-cha, annotated by Dung-dkar Blo-bzang 'phrin-las, dBang-rgyal and bSod-nams
eds., Mi-rigs dpe-skrun-khang, Beijing 1992).
15. See, e.g., Ba-bzhed (p. 9 lines 15-16): "When khrims-bu-chu (sic for chung) was enforced, the noble religion was
destroyed", and mKhas-pa'i dga'-ston (p. 303 line 15).
16. Ba-bzhed tells that the Jo-bo of Ra-sa 'Phrul-snang was initially buried under the sand after it was not possible to
take it back to China (ibid. p. 8 line 22-p. 9 line 4). But, following calamities occurring to the ministers who were
against Buddhism, it was brought to sKyid-grong (ibid. p. 9 line 20-p. 10 line 1).
17. Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi rnam-thar (p. 396 line 5-p. 397 line 2): "When chos-rgyal Khri-srong Ide-btsan had not
yet reached maturity, some wicked ministers, such as Ma-zhang Khron-pa-skyes, who opposed Buddhism,
destroyed the Buddhist law. A plan was made to take Ha-Idan ston-pa rin-po-che to China, but even a thousand
men could not move it (any farther). After they buried it underground, many inauspicious signs occurred. (p. 397)
Thinking to carry it to India, when the two mules, carrying it, reached Mang-yul, it is said that it was not possible
to cross through the gorges on the way. Hence it is said that Jo-bo Shaka yid-bzhin nor-bu remained in Kyid-grong
for some fourteen years".
18. Ba-bzhed (p. 11 lines 10-13); "Since [sBa gSal-snang) made a request to the Ball-polking to be influential (with
Shanta-rakshi-ta), he invited to Mang-yul Shanta-rakshi-ta, (called) Zhi-ba-'tsho in Tibetan, (and) known as Bo-dhi-



Historiographical Material on Early skyid-grong
291
that he had held at court. Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kyi mnam-thar says that Khri-srong Ide-btsan was asked to
bestow such a grant by two sKyid-grong-pa members of the same family. In fact, the mes-rabs in this
biography documents the involvement of people from sKyid-grong in the construction of bSam-yas, since
the two who advocated Thar-pa shes-rab's candidacy for skyid-grong bla-mchod were the head-carpenter
and the sculptor of the clay statues. 19
Hence, members of the Khang Byang-chub gling-pa from gNas left skyid-grong and, like the mGos
ancestors of the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa, served the lha-sras bisan-po in dBus.
They returned home after the year of the sheep 779 when bSam-yas was completed. It will be shown
below when those of the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa settled in Kyid-grong.
Thar-pa shes-rab was the ancestor of the Khang family of syid-grong and the religious exponent who,
upon his return from dBus, first settled with members of his family in skyid-grong-'thil. Soon after, Thar-
pa shes-rab was responsible for the foundation of Byang-chub-gling, the hermitage from which the name of
the noble Byang-chub gling-pa family derives.?? Byang-chub-gling was thus a holy place in Kyid-grong
established during the reign of Khri-srong Ide-btsan.
The links between bSam-yas and skyid-grong extend beyond Khri-srong Ide-btsan's patronage of Thar-
pa shes-rab and the participation of the latter's relatives in the construction of Guru Padma's monastery in
Brag-dmar. A reference in Byams-pa phun-Ishogs-kvi rnam-thar to the rather rare existence of a temple
which, very much like the scheme of Srong-btsan sgam-po's demoness, is classified as a yang 'dul Iha-
khang of Sam-yas, points to another association between the skyid-grong area and the latter holy place.23
sa-twa, who possessed many qualities of knowledge and brilliance. In Mang-yul, they built two gtsug-lag-khang".
This is confirmed by Ne'u pandi-ta (sNgon-gvi gtam me-tog-gi phreng.ba p. 28 lines 1-5) (Ne'u pandi-ta Grags-pa
smon-lam blo-gros, SNgon-gyi gtam me-log-gi phreng-ba, in Bod-kvi lo-rgyus deb-ther khag-Inga, Chab-spel Tshe-
brtan phun-tshogs ed., Gangs-can rig-mdzod, vol. 9, Bod-ljongs mi-dmangs dpe-skun-khang, Ha-sa 1990).
19. Byams-pa phun-Ishogs-kyi rnam-thar (f. 2a line 4-f2b line 3): "In antiquity, the bla'i mchod-gnas ("officiating bla-
ma") of chos-rgyal Khri-srong Ide-btsan, the monk of Khang (Khang-gi ban-sde (sic)) Thar-pa shes-rab succeeded
in accomplishing the task of serving the king from the viewpoint of the two systems (ie, religious and secular). At
that time, (f. 2b) as both the master carpenter, the ancestor (mes-po) [of the Byang-chub gling-pa family), ha-shang
"De-ba, and the maker of the clay sculptures, the ancestor (mes-po) [of the Byang-chub gling-pa family), sTag-
btsan klu-btsan, who were the builders of bSam-yas Mi- gyur lhun-gyis grub-pa'i gtsug-lag-khang, earnestly
pleaded with king Khri-srong Ide-btsan: "You should appoint ban-sde Thar-pa shes-rab to be bla'i mchod-nas at our
place, the town of happiness" in Mang-yul (Mang-vui sKvid-pa'i grong-khyer, i.e. Mang-yul sKyid-grong), which
is the land of the sandalwood self-originated 'Phags-pa sPyan-ras-gzigs, where, during summer the snow does not
melt, [and], during winter the leaves and flowers do not dry". As they pleaded so, the king promised to fulfil their
wish saying: "I will send you to hold the land at the Bal-Bod border and to render service to the sandalwood self-
originated statue of 'Phags-pa".".
20. dPa'-bo gtsug-lag 'phreng-ba has published the bka-gtsigs of the bSam-yas edict, a document contemporary with
the construction of the temple, where it is said that its receptacles (rten) were installed in a sheep year, on the tenth
day of the spring month (mKhas-pa'i dga'-ston p. 371 lines 4-5) (see n. 12). This sheep year has been assessed by
Richardson as 779 which he considers the year of bSam-yas' completion (Richardson H., "The First Tibetan Chos
'byung", Tibet Journal, vol. 5 1980, p. 63).
21. Thar-pa shes-rab's residence in the area, where 'Phags-pa Wa-ti'i lha-khang stands, was reportedly between 'Ba-
ra lha-khang and Ha-khang dKar-ru (see n. 37), the former being the yang dul temple of Sam-yas (see n. 23) and
the latter being the temple founded by Jo-bo-rje (see n. 34 and 35).
22. Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kvi rnam-thar (f. 2b lines 3-5): "They arrived at this country. They settled down to the south
of the 'Phags-pa of Mang-yul Kyid-grong. At that time, sKyid-grong-thil was chosen as the residence of Thar pa
shes-rab, the ancestor of the Khang [family]. As for the hermitage, he resided during summer at the place
resembling a khyung landing with spread wings on the ground, which is above a lateral [valley) to the north-east of
'Phags-pa. He also established the hermitage known as Byang-chub-gling, which is to the north-west of this area.
[Thar-pa shes-rab) resided there".
23. Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kvi rnam-thar (f. 3a lines 5-6): "The name 'Ba'-ra lha-khang was given to the vang.dul
Tha-khang of bSam-yas. At present, between these two (dKar-ru and 'Ba -ra) is a big heap of stones. This was the
residence (gzim-khang) of Thar-pa shes-rab".



292
Roberto Vitali
The link between Mang-yul and the main temples of the spurgyal dynasty kings is again introduced in
'Phags-pa Wa-ti'i rnam-thar which adds that 'On-chang-do too had a mtha - 'dul Iha-khang in sKyid-
grong.24 The only difference between the two sources is that the former classifies it as a yang-'dul temple,
whereas the latter prefers to consider both of them as mtha '- 'dul. The original name of Sam-yas' yang-'dul
Iha-khang is lost, but not the later one which is given as 'Ba'-ra lha-khang at the time of Jo-bo-rje's sojour
in skyid-grong (see below). The name of 'On-cang-do's mtha '- 'dul Iha-khang is given as dGe-rgyas-kyi
lha-khang, later known as Sa-lung-ma.
Although there exists a scheme in IDe'u Jo-sras chos-'byung, according to which the temples built by
Srong-btsan sgam-po to pin down the limbs of the demoness are attributed to Khri-srong Ide-btsan as a
further religious activity at the same holy places (see Vitali, "The narrative of Srong btsan sgam po subduing
the demoness: A study of its scheme and historical implications", forthcoming), the present author has not
seen Srong-btsan sgam-po's scheme used to classify temples built by Khri-stong Ide-btsan and Ral-pa-can.25
On the other hand, one must stop short of suggesting that, in this case, the scheme of Srong-btsan sgam-
po's demoness is applied to the temples of the latter two kings, because this notion of the skyid-grong border
temples is an isolated example, and may not comprise other temples to form a network of Iha-khang.
After the last phase of bstan-pa snga-dar during the reign of Ral-pa-can, a long period of silence befell
sKyid-grong as far as can be seen from the local literature.
Noble families of sKyid-grong during bstan-pa phyi-dar: the Byang-chub gling-pa
Both the histories of the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa and Byang-chub gling-pa, as recounted in the sources discussed
in this work, have generation gaps in their genealogies.
The gap in the Byang-chub gling-pa genealogy is too obvious to create historical problems, for it
extends from after the foundation of Byang-chub-gling during the reign of Khri-srong Ide-btsan until bstan-
pa phyi-dar, thereby covering the dark period, whose duration is even longer than that normally found in
most of the other sources.
The gap in the genealogy of the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa requires more subtle assessment and allows for an
attempt at fixing the chronology of the missing generations.
I will introduce first the history of the Byang-chub gling-pa during early bstan-pa phyi-dar and only
thereafter that of the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa.
The obscurity in the history of the Byang-chub gling-pa is dispelled with Jo-bo-rje A-ti-sha's visit to
sKyid-grong, having come to Tibet on the invitation of the ruler of the mNga -ris skor-gsum kingdom. In
fact, following his sojourn of three years in Upper West Tibet, he was due to return to Vikramashila in
fulfilment of the promise made by Nag-tsho lo-tsa-ba Tshul-khrims rgyal-ba (1017-?) to bring Jo-bo-rje back
to India after that length of time. Not much was traditionally known about what prevented Nag-tsho lo-tsa-
ba from keeping his word, but for the accounts that an outbreak of war had made travel impossible, and their
description of Nag-tsho's consternation over breaking his word and Jo-bo-rje's ambivalence over returning
to India, knowing that his destiny was to remain in Tibet, which are too well known to be cited here from
the many sources relating these events.26
24. 'Phags-pa Wa-ti'i mnam-thar (f. 23a line 7-f. 23b line 1): "Moreover, the area from here until the gro-lam("wayside
halting place for food") is believed to be very sacred. From the gtsug-lag-khang of the self-originated (statue] (f.
23b) until pho-brang rDzong-dkar, in skyid-rong itself are 'Ba-ra lha-khang, the tha-dul (spelled as) of Sam-yas
[and] dpal de-rgyas-kyi lha-khang, nowadays known as Sa-lung-ma, the tha-dul of 'On-'chang-sdo (spelled as)"
25. Traces of schemes resembling that of Srong btsan sgam po's srin mo and attributed to Khri song lde btsan and
Guru Padma 'byung gnas, but on a modest scale, are found in specific areas of Tibet. The case of Glo bo and a local
srin mo laying on her back, whose subjugation led Guru Padma to build Glo dGe kar (see, e.g., O-rgyan gling-pa,
Padma bka-thang, Si-khron mi-rigs dpe-skrun-hang, Chengdu 1987, p. 377 lines 2-16), is one of them.
26. I wish to cite here mChims Nam-mkha-grags, Jo-bo dpal-Idan A-ti-sha'i rnam-thar rgyas-pa (p. 161 line 4-p. 162
line 2), for it is a source that introduces in some detail how A-ti-sha came to know that his fate was to end his days
in Tibet: "When the lo-tsa-ba went to Gya gar earlier, at the time of receiving dBu-ma rtogs-ge 'bar-ba from Jo-



Historiographical Material on Early sKyid-grong
293
In the mes-rabs of Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kyi mnam-thar it is written that Jo-bo-rje sojoured for one
year in sKyid-grong, waiting for the invitation by the learned masters of dBus-g Isang to reach him.?? This
is a deviant account of the events, for, in most cases, 'Brom-ston-pa (1017-1076) is said to have gone to Pu-
hrang Gya-zhing to deliver the invitation to Jo-bo-rje. According to Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kyi mam-
thar, Jo-bo-rje reached Mang-yul still without knowing that he was expected in dBus-gTsang and only the
occurrence of the border war prevented him from leaving before the arrival of the summons from
Central Tibet.
This account helps to fix Jo-bo-rje's arrival in g Tsang to fire dog 1046 rather than wood bird 1045,
given that his one year sojourn in Kyid-grong is confirmed by mChims Nam-kha-grags (1210-1285) in his
Jo-bo dpal-Idan A-ti-sha'i rnam-thar rgyas-pa (see n. 35). He engaged in numerous activities, including
founding a temple and giving elaborate teachings. The detail in which these are described leaves little doubt
about the historical fact of his prolonged presence and work in Kyid-grong. Although the lack of reference
to his performing rab-gnas at the temple which he founded (Jo-bo-rje consecrated many tha-khang during
his years in Tibet) may imply that he did not stay to see it completed, there are no particular reasons to
antedate Jo-bo-rje's arrival in Central Tibet. In fact, it seems that Jo-bo-rje and his entourage were not in a
hurry to go to Central Tibet because the official summons from the masters of that land had not reached
him yet.
Moreover, the version of events in Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kyi mam-thar sheds light on the matter of
Jo-bo-rje's decision not to go back to India with some circumstantial precision. This source provides details
of the war which prevented his return, making it appear as a much less insuperable obstacle than is normally
held. It amounted to a border conflict war on the frontier between present-day Nepal and Tibet and the
bo at Gho-so-ma-pu-ri, Jo-bo said: "Phags-pa sPyan-ras-gzigs gave me a prophecy which said: "[You will leave
[your] body behind in Tibet in twenty years from now due to [karmic) ripening. After being reborn as Nam-mkha
dri-ma me-pa, the son of a lHa, in dGa-Idan due to the accumulation of prayers, you will listen to profound and
extensive teachings from m on-po Byams-pa". Then, two years after, ["Phags-pa sPyan-ras-gzigs appeared to me)
at 'Bi-kra-ma-shila and said: "After leaving your body in Tibet in eighteen years from now due to [karmic) ripening,
you will proceed to listen, with your mind and body, to teachings from m on-po Byams-pa". Due to the power of
prayers, (p. 162) disregarding whether I will go [next], I am [bound to stay in Tibet". According to Lo-isa-bal
bstod-pa: "At the time of giving rTog-ge 'bar-ba in So-ma-pu-ri, you said: "[I] will transfer (my) life in twenty
years from now". Two years later, at 'Bi-kra ma-shi-ni-la (spelled as), you said: “[1]will transfer (my] life in
eighteen years from now. I will leave (my] body in Tibet".".
27. Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kvi mnam-thar (f. 26 line 7-f. 3a line 1): "[Jo-bo-rje] was compelled to stay one year in
Mang-yul, as "Brom-ston-pa had sent a letter to the dBus-g Tsang (f. 3a) masters to invite Jo-bo, but the invitation]
had not yet arrived". His one year stay in skyid-grong is confirmed by mChims Nam-mkha'-grags in his Jo-bo
dpal-ldan A-ti-sha'i mam-thar rgyas-pa (p. 162 line 2) (see below n. 35).
28. See, e.g., Do-rje mdzes-'od, bka-brgyud rnam-thar chen-mo (p. 272 line 6-p. 273 line 1) (Do-rje ndzes-'od,
bka-brgyud-kyi mnam-thar chen-mo rin-po-che'l gter-mdzod gdos-od 'byung-gnas, "Bri-gung bka'-brgyud-pa
from the Nepal-Tibet Borderland, D. Tsondu Senghe ed., Bir Tibetan Society, Bir 1985).
29. mChims Nam-mkha -grags, Jo-bo dpal-Idan A-ti-sha i mam-thar rgvas-pa (p. 157 line 6-p. 158 line 2): "Jo-bo
thought to go back to Gya-gar. Despite the original agreement and his determination to accompany him back,
Nag-tso) lo-tsa-ba could not ask him to go back] because Jo-bo was pleased to be with lha-btsun-pa [Byang-chub-
'od].dGe-bshes ston-pa (i.e. 'Brom-ston-pa) too was not able to make [his own) earnest request. However, ["Brom-
]ston-pa (finally) reported (shyan-du-gsol) to him: "[dBus-g Isang) is a land where people have depth of mind and
broad vision, and (where) there is a rgyal-khrims. Given that the gung-blon chen-po, who were capable persons,
were provided with knowledge. (p. 158) there are many gtsug-lag-khang such as 1Ha-sa and Sam-yas, and monks".
He requested: "They all will be pleased to have Jo-bo staying there". Jo-bo was very pleased".
Ibid. (f. 160 line 6-p. 161 line 1): "Then, the dge-bshes (ie. 'Brom-ston-pa) left [Pu-hrang) accompanying Jo-bo
dpon-g.yog, and delayed (the duration of the journey, as much as possible, hoping that the Tibetan masters would
come (p. 161), [while) the lo-tsa-ba (ie. Nag-tsho) made it as fast as possible. The Tibetan masters not having
come, they reached Mang-yul in order to proceed to Bal-po rdzong".



294
Roberto Vitali
parties are described, on one side, as the Bal-po rdzong-pa of rong nub and shar, and on the other, what the
text defines as Sa-Mu-Ti mam-gsum.
The Bal-po rdzong-pa were troops controlling outposts of the Kathmandu Valley in that border land.
The reference to rong nub and shar very likely pertains to the bifurcation of the area (presently in Nepal)
into two valleys: the one in the east, later known as Glang-thang, and the collateral valley to its west.
Identification of the people or the territories classified under the name Sa-Mu-Ti rnam-gsum is more
difficult. It seems to this author that it may refer to people of Tibetan origin, and thus ethnically distinct from
the Newar, or to place names in the Tibetan-speaking world. There are indicators that the extension of the
Tibetan world in antiquity reached farther south than the present frontier in the skyid-grong/Glang-thang
area (see below) and that the Bal-po rdzong-pa may have been settled in positions closer to the Kathmandu
Valley, but within the two divisions of the borderland on the side of present-day Nepal.
The outcome of the war is unknown. The sources do not pay attention to it thereafter, since they
mention it only as the pretext for A-ti-sha not to go back to India, and concentrate on his successive
enterprises in Tibet. The limited scale of the conflict is another indication that Jo-bo-rje had already made
up his mind to remain in Tibet, and thus felt convenient that the involvement of the Kathmandu Valley in
the conflict blocked the only direct and easily negotiable access to central India available to him.
During his sojourn in Kyid-grong, he gave teachings in Grwa and Lan-bde, but Jo-bo-rje preferred the
gNas valley which reminded him of India."
The Byang-chub gling-pa and the other members of the same family, known as Khyim-po che-ba,
who also were inhabitants of gNas, invited him to their place. In gNas, Jo-bo-rje founded Byams-pa'i lha-
30. Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kyi rnam-thar (f. 2b lines 6-7): "After (Jo-bo-rje) diffused the teachings (in Gu-ge), due to
dge-bshes Gung-thang-pa Nag-tsho lo-tsa-ba's promise to slob-dpon to bring him back to Gya-gar after three
years, he (Nag-tsho) thought to bring him to Gya-gar. When they arrived in Mang-yul, those who are known as Sa-
Mu-Ti, altogether three (rnam-gsum), were fighting a war against the Bal-po rdzong-pa of the eastern and western
rong, and it was not possible to proceed to Bal-po". The name of one of the two factions at war is cited with a
deviant spelling in mChims Nam-mkha'-grags, Jo-bo dpal-Idan A-ri-sha'i mnam-thar rgyas-pa (p. 161 lines 1-2)
which does not mention the other: "At that time, the fight between Sa-Man-Te, altogether three, having broken out,
Bal-po rdzong was off limits, and they could not proceed on. It is said that this was due to the merit of Tibet. Hence,
the lo-tsa-ba was very worried, but Jo bo said: "Do not feel uncomfortable. It is not our fault, because it is beyond
our control". It is said that the lo-tsa-ba was happy and urged him: "Let's go to Tibet".".
31. The king of the Kathmandu Valley who ruled at the time of the war, and probably was the lord of the Bal-po rdzong-
pa, could have been Jayadeva if the Kaiser Vamshavali is to be credited when it says that he ruled for twenty years
(assessed as 1041-1061 by Petech (Petech L., Mediaeval History of Nepal (750-1482), S.O.R. LIV, ISMEO, Roma
1984, p. 40)), otherwise extant colophons record Bhaskaradeva (who belonged to the Thakuri lineage) reigning in
1045 and 1047, thus possibly indicating that Jayadeva and Bhaskaradeva were co-rulers, which is the statement
found in the same Vamshavali (ibid. p. 40-42).
32. Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kyi rnam-thar (f. 3a lines 1-2): "While waiting in Kyid-grong, Jo-bo and his disciples gave
extensive teachings in Lan-'de and Gra. From the top of the Lan-'de pass, when, [looking] downwards, he saw
gNas, resembling mainland (thil) Gya-gar, he said: "I will go there". They went from Gra to gNas. When they
arrived at the entrance of the pass leading to gNas, since Jo bo was happy, this place, which is where he had a smile
on his face, is still known at present as 'Dzum-la-kha ("the land of the pass where he smiled")".
33. The subdivisions of the Khang from Byang-chub-gling are briefly outlined in the mes-rabs of Byams-pa phun-
tshogs-kyi mnam-thar (f. 4a) only in reference to the religious side of the family: "Among the lineage of Khang, the
Khyim-po che-ba family are the bla-ma, (while the Khang-mo che-ba family are the laymen. As all the brothers
(i.e. Khyim-po che-ba and Khang-mo che-ba) became very meritorious, among the Khyim-po che-ba one (group]
is known as the Khang-gsar-ba and one is known as the Bla-brang-pa. (Hence), they are divided into two. Among
the Khang-gsar-ba descendance, one [line] went to Rong mThong-smon to be the mchod-gnas. This lineage, made
by many bla-ma who showed many signs) of their sadhana, still exists there. Concerning the Khang-gsar-ba, they
are also divided into two [families). Their lineage still exists to the present not having come to an end. Concerning



Historiographical Material on Early sKyid-grong
295
khang, originally known as Ha-khang dKar-ru. He personally made an image of an unspecified deity
which was placed inside the bum-pa of a mchod-rten.36
The circumstances in which another temple, IHa-khang Bar-ma, was founded are somewhat more
obscure than those of Ha-khang dKar-ru. It is unclear who establish it (probably not Jo-bo-rje, or he would
have been credited with the enterprise) and when. Given that its construction is mentioned after that of Jo.
bo-rje's temple, one may assume (but not definitively) that it was built during bstan-pa phyi-dar. Both
temples were located in the area where Thar-pa shes-rab had settled in the 8th century, and monastic quarters
were later added to them."
Noble families of skyid-grong during bstan-pa phyi-dar and later: the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa
From the late 9th or early 10th century until the 12th century only two generations of the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa
family are mentioned in the sources. Genealogical gaps during the transitional period between bstan-pa
snga-dar and bstan-pa phyi-dar are quite common in literary sources. The following discussion will assess
whether this gap occurs after the former period, as is more common, or during the latter, which is rare.
All the texts concerning the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa family say that Kun-dga' dpal-'byor and his younger
brother, the sons of Padma gung-btsan according to them, went to mNga-ris skor-gsum in the retinue of
sKyid-Ide Nyi-ma-mgon(i.e. in the early 10th century)." Kun-dga' dpal-'byor's younger brother was for
many years the abbot of what the sources define as the Pu-hrang sde-bzhi," and became known as Rab-'byor
bdag-nyid chen-po." Next in the genealogical succession is Man-ston Sangs-rgyas, the son of Kun-dga
dpal-'byor according to the same sources, who was a religious exponent of remarkable importance.
Man-ston Sangs-rgyas had a nephew by the name of 'Jam-dbyangs chen-po who was a disciple of bla
ma Zhang g. Yu-brag-pa (1121-1193 or 1194).43
the Bla-brang-pa, they are divided into two [families)". The subdivision of the Khyim-po che-ba into two families
each time is too repetitive to be casual and must have followed an established pattern of kinship among its members.
Khang from Byang-chub-gling
Khyim-po che-ba
Khang-mo che-ba
Khang-gsar-ba
Bla-brang-pa
two families two families
This classification of the Khang from Byang-chub-gling cannot be assessed historically, as it remains unclear when
this organization of the religious (or Khyim-po che-ba) members of the family was introduced. The passage
mentioned above is inserted into the mes-rabs of Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kyi mnam-thar immediately after
concluding its treatment of the visit of Sa-pan Kun-dga' rgyal-mtshan (see below in the text), One wonders whether
the inclusion at this point of the text is intentional, indicating that its introduction goes back to the period preceding
the rise of Sa-skya as the main power in Tibet and thus was influenced by this turn of events, or whether it refers
to an earlier time. The latter hypothesis is the correct one for the Khyim-po che-ba are first mentioned in the rnam-
thar on the occasion of their invitation of Jo-bo-rje to gNas (see following note) in the mid 11th century.
34. Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kyi mnam-thar (f. 3a lines 2-4): "At that time, Jo-bo was invited by the local people to
Khyim-po-che and Byang-chub-gling. They served him sumptuously. He observed dbyar-gnas in this locality. He
founded Byams-pa'i lha-khang and established great monastic quarters. At present the lha-khang and the three
[kinds of receptacles (i.e. body, speech and mind) have become waste and are transformed into fields. On the ruins
of the cold] lha-khang is a [new] lha-khang (and) the field of the abbot is there to procure his maintenance".
35. Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kyi mnam-thar (f. 3a line 5): "At that time. Byams-pa'i lha-khang founded by Jo-bo in
sKyid-grong-'thil was known as lha-khang dKar-ru", mChims Nam-mkha'-grags, Jo-bo dpal-Idan 4-ti-sha i rnam-
thar rgyas-pa (p. 162 line 2) records the name of the temple in a slightly different way: "Then, during his one year
[stay) in Mang-yul, [Jo-bo-rje] built I Ha-khang dkar-po"
36. Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kyi rnam-thar (f. 3a lines 4-5): “The image of the deity, made by [Jo-bo-rje) personally,
which is inside the bum-pa [of the mchod-rten), is known as mchod-rten-mu".



296
Roberto Vitali
There are two possibilities. Either Kun-dga' dpal-'byor and his brother were contemporaries of Nyi-ma-
mgon, and the gap in the genealogy occurred in the period of bstan-pa phyi-dar, or their lives must be post-
dated to the 12th century. The former hypothesis is unlikely, for it would make Rab-'byor bdag-nyid chen-
po the abbot of Pu-hrang sde-bzhi at a time when very little Buddhism was diffused in mNga -ris skor-gsum,
although during the reign of sKyid-lde Nyi-ma-mgon a little Chos is recorded to have been practised in his
kingdom (Vitali, The Kingdoms of Gu.ge Pu.hrang, p. 164-165 and n. 220).
It is more probable that Man-ston Sangs-rgyas' uncle, Rab-'byor bdag-nyid chen-po, was active in Pu-
hrang around the early 12th century or in the second quarter of that century. Indeed, the statement that Rab-
'byor bdag-nyid chen-po was the abbot of Pu-hrang sde-bzhi seems to confirm the fact that Buddhism
flourished in Pu-hrang during the first three quarters of the 12th century, even if on a minor scale by
comparison with the great season of bstan-pa phyi-dar in sTod (see Vitali, The Kingdoms of Gu.ge Pu.hrang,
p. 361-364). This state of affairs would thus be substantiated by reference to the name of a major religious
master (Rab-'byor bdag-nyid chen-po) active there.
Man-ston Sangs-rgyas' biography is succinctly but vividly outlined in the various documents, and the
circumstances under which the major events in his life took place can be pieced together by collating them.
His movements from place to place are not consistently recorded. According to rTen-gsum gzhengs-pa'i
dkar-chag (f. 3b line 2), he first settled in Ding-ri and then moved to sKyid-grong. However, Ngag-dbang
ye-shes-kyi rnam-thar, which relates events in more detail, states that Man-ston Sangs-rgyas went to Gung-
thang in the service of the local king, and consequently, Khyung-rdzong dkar-po was built at Me-rdo-thang
(i.e. the plain of rDzong-dkar).44 This is the well known palace from which the Gung-thang kings ruled and
derived the name of Khab Gung-thang-pa that has characterised them ever since.
37. Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kvi rnam-thar (f. 3a lines 5-7): "At present, between these two (dKar-ru and 'Ba'-ra) in the
east is a big heap of stones. This was the residence (gzim-khang) of Thar-pa shes-rab. In this locality, the great
quarters for the monks of the lineage of the Khang family were founded. These were used as the place for the
visiting lo-pan. Owing to the patronage (?, zin-so) of the two systems (religious and secular), in the area chosen [by
the family of Byams-pa phun-tshogs) as its residence, another (temple) was built, whose name was lha-khang Bar-
ma. Following this foundation, even now our (i.e. the Byang-chub gling-pa family's) place of gNas is also known
as 1Ha-bar (lha-khang Bar-ma). My (i.e. Byams-pa phun-tshogs') family (tshang) members are also known as Ha-
bar-ba".
38. rTen-gsum gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag (f. 3a line 5-f. 3b line 1): "Kun-dga' (f. 3b) dpal-'byor went to gTsang, and,
when sKyid-Ide Nyi-ma-mgon proceeded to sPu-rang, he accompanied him [and] worked [for him)
uncompromisingly". See also Blo-gros chos-phel-gvi rnam-thar (p. 283 lines 3-4) and Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi
rnam-thar (p. 398 line 3).
39. See Vitali, The Kingdoms of Gu.ge Pu.hrang (Addendum One p. 548) for fixing the terminus post quem for the
establishment of the mNga'-ris skor-gsum kingdom by sKyid-lde Nyi-ma-mgon to the monkey year 912.
40. The way the term sde-bzhi is used in this passage of Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi mnam-thar (p. 398 line 3) leaves room
for speculation. Does sde-bzhi stand for bZhi-sde, the ancient and important locality in Pu-hrang-smad to the south-
west of sTag-la-mkhar or should sde-bzhi be taken ad litteram, thus implying the "four (monastic) communities"
of Pu-hrang? In the latter case, the identity of these communities remains obscure.
41. Blo-gros chos-'phel-gyi mnam-thar (p. 283 line 4): "Since his (i.e. Kun-dga' dpal-'byor's) younger brother became
a man of religion, he was the mkhan-po of sPu-rang sde-bzhi for a long time. For that reason, he became known as
Rab-byor bdag-nyid chen-po". See also rTen-gsum gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag (f. 3b lines 1-2) and Ngag-dbang ye-
shes-kyi rnam-thar (p. 398 lines 3-4).
42. Blo-gros chos-'phel-gyi rnam-thar (p. 283 lines 4-5): "Kun-dga' dpal-'byor's son (was) Man-ston Sangs-rgyas".
See also r Ten-gsum gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag (f. 3b line 2) and Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi rnam-thar (p. 398 line 4).
43. rTen-gsum gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag (f. 3b lines 4-5): "His (i.e. Man-ston Sangs-rgyas) maternal nephew 'Jam-
dbyangs chen-po received teachings from Zhang-ston g. Yu-brag-pa". See also Blo-gros chos-'phel-gyi rnam-thar
(p. 283 line 5) and Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi rnam-thar (p. 400 line 5).
44. Ngag.dbang ye-shes-kyi mnam-thar (p. 398 lines 4-5): "Man-ston Sangs-rgyas went to mNga-ris Gung-thang. He
rendered service to the (Gung-thang) king. Khyung-rdzong dkar-po was founded at Me-rdo-thang"



Historiographical Material on Early sKyid-grong
297
This assessment of the period (around the second half of the 12th century) and the protagonists of the
original foundation of the castle are in sharp contrast with the information and circumstances recorded in
Mar-lung pa'i rnam-thars and Gung-thang gdung-rabs (p. 100 line 7-p. 102 line 14). Both the latter sources
say that Khyung-rdzong dkar-po was built by the Gung-thang king 'Bum-lde-mgon (1253-1280) in the years
earth snake 1269-iron horse 1270. Hence, either the account in Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi mnam-thar is
chronologically wrong or two foundations occurred at different periods of Gung-thang's history. This would
mean that the original residence of the Gung-thang kings had suffered destruction in the meantime. A
destruction of the original Khyung-rdzong dkar-po is recorded in Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi mnam-thar, 46
which says that the Byang-pa (i.e. the nomads of southern Byang-thang) were angered by its construction.
They destroyed the castle and threatened the life of the heir-apparent (sadly unnamed in the text) to the
Gung-thang throne, who was able narrowly to escape being caught by the Byang-pa because Man-ston
rescued him and brought him to Mang-yul to save his life.47 Man-ston was thus instrumental in averting an
interruption of the Gung-thang dynasty." Confusingly, a struggle between 'Bum-Ide-mgon and the Byang-
pa is also recorded in the year 1269 (see above n. 45), but this occurred because the Byang-pa wanted to
prevent the construction of Khyung-rdzong dkar-po rather than to destroy it. Hence, the circumstances of
the two conflicts do not correspond and point to two different constructions of Khyung-rdzong dkar-po, one
in the 12th century and the other in the 13th
Another important implication of Man-ston Sangs-rgyas involvement in the foundation of Khyung-
rdzong dkar-po is that the episode allows one to assess the gap in the genealogy of the Jam-dpal gling-pa
with some degree of confidence. One major reason for postdating Man-ston Sangs-rgyas' life is that there
was no king of Gung-thang nor any kingdom by that name in the next generation after sKyid-Ide Nyi-ma-
mgon since none of Nyi-ma-mgon's nephews, the sMad-kyi Ide-gsum, became the ruler of Gung-thang. The
45. Mar-lung-pa'i rnam thar (f. 348a line 5-f. 349a line 1): "Having grown up, the son of Gung-thang Khab-pa mnga-
dag b Tsun-lde, rgyal-bu 'Bum-Ide-(f. 348b)mgon obtained from zhang-po Sa-skya-pa the seal m o-lung, and
started the construction of a castle at Me-rdo-thang. dBon-po mGon-po-'bum, the elder of the two sons that my
sister dbon-mo Klu-sman had with the Yang-thog-pa dbon-po, said: "In general, the sde-dgo-bzhi (sic for sgo) of
the lHo-Nub-Gung-gsum are very arrogant, in particular, since Me-rdo-thang is a place of the Yang-thog-pa, rtsad-
chung Khab-pa (i.e. the Gung-thang king) is not allowed to build a castle there. Since we have a tsha-zhang
("maternal uncle-nephew") relation, we will offer them houses and land if there will not be disputes. We too have
our right to own this land". Having heard his words, we dpon-slob thought to go and occupy this land. We left in
the early morning after having our food. As soon as we arrived, as the Yang-thog-pa emissaries had caused a clash
with the Sa-skya-pa Hor-dra, a servant of the Yang-thog-pa, named A-dar sdig-pa, who had come to fight for a-ce
Klu-sman's son, was killed. Moreover, (f. 349a) four or five men were injured. A conflict erupted for a while. I told
them to give it up [and] they left accordingly".
Ibid. (f. 350a lines 2-5): "At that time, mKhon-tsha (sic for 'Khon) 'Bum-lde-mgon was misguided and, because of
the support by the zhang po (ie. Sa-skya), Sa-skya dpon-chen Ag-len arrived to Gung-thang?]. As he kept the four
mkhan-po of the sde-sgo-bzhi in custody at the door of the Khab (i.e. Gung-thang) (khab-gyi sgo), he completely
impeded them. The mNga-ris rgya(sic)-isho bcu-gsum were organized. Pho-brang Khyung-rdzong dkar-po
was built".
46. Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi rnam-thar (p. 398 lines 5-6): "When the Byang-pa, who had become enemies (of Gung-
thang), destroyed (rlag) Khyung-rdzong, after Man-ston hid the prince (of Gung-thang] inside a well, he brought
him to Mang-yul Kyid-grong in the course of one night. He [thereby] rendered a great service, for the lineage (of
Gung-thang) did not become interrupted".
47. Seeking sanctuary in Mang-yul reminds one of the same attempt made by the Gung-thang king mGon-po-lde during
the first Ya-rtse/Gung-thang war, who fled to sKyid-grong but met with a less fortunate end than Man-ston's
protégé, since the king was captured by the invading Ya-rtse-patroops and put to death at rDzong-dkar (see Gung-
thang gdung-rabs p. 93 and Vitali, The Kingdoms of Gu.ge Pu hrang, n. 797).
48. The identity of this king of Gung-thang remains uncertain, but the candidates are mGon-po-lde or more probably
one of his two predecessors (dBang-phyug-Ide or sKyob-pa-Ide). Byang-pa revolt had reached the extent of
constituting a concrete threat to the life of the prince of Gung-thang (an assassination plot?).



298
Roberto Vitali
foundation of the Gung-thang kingdom took place only one generation later with 'Od-zer-lde, the elder son
of dPal-Ide, the eldest of the sMad-kyi Ide-gsum.
Thus, the gap in the genealogy of the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa occurred from the late 9th or early 10th century
until the late 11th or early 12th century.
The anticipatory position of the literary sources, which consider Man-ston as the son of Kun-dga' dpal-
'byor (and the latter as a contemporary of Nyi-ma-mgon), would have served to heighten the prestige of the
Jam-dpal-gling-pa by attributing the foundation of 'Jam-dpal-gling (by Man-ston's son 'Jam dbyangs chen
po; see below) to bstan-pa phyi-dar, a most fertile period for religious establishments.
Man-ston then set off from Sa-skya to Mang-yul to fulfil the request sent to this monastery by the ruler
of Mang-yul for an officiating bla-ma.49 The local ruler is named rgyal-bu Jo-sras but nothing more is said
about him, so it is difficult to establish his identity without further information. Given that sKyid-grong is
recorded in the sources to have been under Gung-thang when the brgya-tsho bcu-gsum (or the thirteen
districts under Gung-thang) were established by 'Bum-lde-mgon before 1268, rgyal-bu Jo-sras may very
well have been a prince of Mang-yul. But this is not openly stated in the material used in the present work.
An alternative conjecture is that rgyal-bu Jo-sras was the same Gung-thang rgyal-bu who was saved by
Man-ston Sangs-rgyas from the hands of the Byang-pa and that, out of gratitude or devotion for that spiritual
master, he pressed Sa-skya to send him to Mang-yul, which, in this hypothesis, was already under Gung-
thang in the 12th century. The next sentence in Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi rnam-tharso seems to indicate that
rgyal-bu Jo-sras was the local Mang-yul ruler but this is far from having been ascertained.
The account also seems to indicate that a bla-ma/patron nexus with Sa-skya existed at that time,
considerably before Gung-thang benefited from matrimonial relations with Sa-skya in the following century.
After moving to sKyid-grong, Man-ston Sangs-rgyas was engaged in the foundation of a series of
temples which were among the most important of the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa family of Grwa. rTen-gsum
gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag is the crucial source, with its sharp account of events involving Man-ston, his
nephew 'Jam-dbyangs chen-po and the latter's son Rin-chen tshul-khrims, which led to the establishment of
the main seats of the 'Jam-dpa gling-pa. But the best details are provided by Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi rnam-
thar, although its overall account is somewhat confused.
49. Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi rnum-thar (p. 398 line 6-p. 399 line 3): "Moreover, since rgyal-bu Jo-sras, the lord and
[his subjects, did not have a bla-mchod, (p. 399) a prophecy was made which said: "Jam-dbyangs chen-po will
bring a request to dpal-Idan Sa-skya". After the lord and subjects discussed, they sent seven messengers. After
offering an elaborate mandala, they addressed their request. Due to the really extraordinary mchod-yon bonds
[between them), this order came to Man-ston Sangs-rgyas, the greatest bu-chen ("great disciple"), the incarnation
of 'Jam-dbyangs who sits at the top of the right row, and he (Man-ston) went to Mang-yul sKyid-grong".
50. Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kvi rnam-thar (p. 399 line 3): "[Man-ston) went to Mang-yul sKyid-grong. He was appointed
as the head bla[-maof the king and ministers, and resided for a while at the huge rock resembling a flying lion".
51. rTen-gsum gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag (f. 3b lines 2-4): "From here, he eventually moved to Mang-yul sKyid-grong.
Kan-pa'i dpon-po ha-shang sNying-po being his patron, he offered him sustenance (rtegs sic for stegs), the area of
'Jam-gling, many provisions for the monastery, and appointed him as the bla-ma. Since the subjects gave their sons
as monks to the monastery (brsun-khral, lit. "monk tax"), the settlement was established and he resided in Mang-
yul skyid-grong. Subsequently, Man-ston went to Lan-bde. [Following the prophecy of the mkha'- gro, he
founded Gong-lding dgon-pa".
Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi rnam-thar (p. 399 line 4-p. 400 line 4): "In accordance to the lung-bstan given to him, he
went to Mun-lha. "In the east there is a mountain resembling a tent roof which is a rock in the sky like an open
curtain. Establish a meditation place there". As the prophecy] said so, he went there]. As he stood in meditation
(bsam-gtan) there, he founded [a dgon-pa) whose name is bSam-gtan-dgon. According to the instructions of rje-
btsun Jam-dbyangs, he went on the mountain in the south-west resembling a sleeping elephant, and a rainbow
resembling a spread white scarf appeared in an extraordinary way. As he blessed the land, he founded a dgon-pa,
and, since he had moved (spos-pa) from bSam-gtan-dgon, (p. 400) it took the name sPos-sa. Kyid-mi grong-bdun
("the seven villages of happy people"), Kan ha-shang sNying-po-dpal and the Bong-tshogs lung-pa became his yon-
bdag. Since information came that in the east was a Bon-po family, who would be excellent to convert to Buddhism,



Historiographical Material on Early skyid-grong
299
Man-ston first built bSam-gtan dgon-pa. He was subsequently granted by a local chieftain named Kan-
pa'i dpon-po ha-shang sNying-po-dpal the locality which was to become 'Jam-[dpal]-gling, the family seat.
After building sPos-sa dgon-pa according to Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi rnam-thar, Man-ston went to
Lan-bde, and founded another dgon-pa, called Gong-lding. Apart from Kan-pa'i dpon-po ha-shang sNying-
po-dpal, the local sponsors of these buildings were the Bong-tsho lung-pa in Grwa and Bon-po patrons in
Lan-bde.
The activity of Man-ston Sangs-rgyas can thus be divided into two phases, both preceded by two
interlocutory sojours not concerning the history of Mang-yul and Gung-thang. He first benefited Gung-
thang by preserving its royal lineage. This was preceded by a stay in the Ding-ri area. Then he founded
temples in Mang-yul after a sojourn at Sa-skya.
The sequence of Man-ston's sojourns is: 1) Ding-ri (rTen-gsum gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag); 2) Gung-
thang (and briefly skyid grong) (Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi rnam-thar); 3) Sa-skya; 4) sKyid-grong.
The sequence of Man-ston's foundations is: 1) Khyung-rdzong dkar-po; 2) bSam-gtan dgon-pa; 3)
sPos-sa dgon-pa; 4) Gong-lding dgon-pa.
As mentioned above, Man-ston Sangs-rgyas had a nephew from the maternal side of his family, called
'Jam-dbyangs chen-po in the sources, who was a disciple of bla ma Zhang g. Yu-brag-pa, proving that, in
the course of a generation, the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa moved away from Sa-skya-pa affiliation and towards the
Tshal-pa.
'Jam-dbyangs chen-po's yi-dam was mGon-po phyag-bzhi-pa, which became the chos-skyong of the
'Jam-dpal gling-pa." Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kyi rnam-thar attributes mGon-po to the Byang-chub gling-pa
as their yi-dam chos-skyong. It was given to the latter family by Sa-pan Kun-dga' rgyal-mtshan at the time
of his sojourn in Kyid-grong. Given the Sa-skya-pa predilection for Gur mGon-po, it is probable that the
Byang-chub gling-pa chos-skyong was this form of Ma-ha-ka-la.
Like his uncle, Jam-dbyangs chen-po was active in sKyid-grong and, empowered by the chos-skyong.
embarked upon a campaign of temple building. Only rTen-gsum gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag states that 'Jam-
dbyangs chen-po founded another monastery in Grwa, called dGon-chung Ka-rus4 which it defines as Grwa-
pa rtsa-ba-can ("the root of the Grwa-pa (family]").
he went to the east. Having met the Bon-po sponsors, they said: "Bla-ma rin-po-che, we will render service to you
if you stay here". He said: “[This] land [has good] signs". He stayed at rGya-dpal for some days. During his sleep
he dreamt that a pale blue woman in a ray of clear light appeared and requested him: "Bla-ma-lags, if you make a
dgon-pa here, this is excellent since below is a crawling demoness and above (gong) is a Iding-chung (lit.
"something small floating"). As he went there and founded a dgon-pa, he gave to it the name Gong-lding"
52. The way the sentence in Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi rnam-thar recounting that 'Jam-dbyangs chen-po received
teachings from bla-ma Zhang is constructed (ibid. p. 400 line 5: "des sku-tsha 'Jam-dbyangs chen-po'i bla-ma
Zhang g. Yu-brag-pa'i drung-du byon-nas thugs-sras-su mdzad") would let one assume that his uncle Man-ston
Sangs-rgyas was the disciple of the founder of Tshal Gung-thang. This is denied by the consistent reference to the
fact that it was 'Jam-dbyangs chen-po who was bla-ma Zhang's disciple in all the other sources (rTen-gsum
gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag and both Blo-gros chos-'phel-gyi rnam-thar).
53. rTen-gsum gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag (f. 3b line 5-f. 4a line 1): "As ['Jam-dbyangs chen-po) meditated one-pointedly,
he obtained spiritual powers. After having a vision of the Four-Armed dpal Gon, the latter proclaimed: "I will be
your chos-skyong from now on. (f. 4a) Meditate on ine. You will accomplish your deeds". Gon-po having truly
given this prophecy to him, he is still the chos-skyong (of this lineage) at present". See also Blo-gros chos-phel-
gvi rnam-thar (p. 283 lines 5-6) and Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi mnam-thar (p. 400 line 5).
54. The name dGon-chung Ka-ru bears a striking similarity with lHa-khang dKar-ru established by Jo-bo-rje (see
above), but the location of the latter in g Nas rules out the possibility that it was a new building phase at Jo-bo-rje's
temple, also known as Byams-pa lha-khang.
55. r Ten-gsum gzhengs-paidkar-chag (f. 4a lines 1-2): When ['Jam-dbyangs chen-po] went to Lan-bde, he stayed at
Grwa. He founded dGon-chung Ka-ru with the spoilsis of the Nags-phu-ba. He established Grwa-pa rtsa-ba-can
("the root of the Grwa-pa) [herel". Elsewhere (ibid. f. 6a line 2), the same text has Grwa-sartsa-ba-can ("the root
of the Grwa land").



300
Elle
Roberto Vitali
There is no general agreement in the sources on the attribution of the foundation of dGon-chung Ka-ru
to 'Jam-dbyangs chen-po, for Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi rnam-thar, unlike rTen-gsum gzhengs-pa'i dkar-
chag, says that it was his son Rin-chen tshul-khrims who built this monastery.* Rin-chen tshul-khrims also
founded 'Ga -lhang dgon-pa.
What they agree on is the sponsorship of Rin-chen tshul-khrims by the Men-Zhang sde-gsum (or three
communities of the Men-Zhang"), 57 the nomadic clan of southern Byang-thang which dominated the events
there and in neighbouring territories from the second quarter of the 12th century onward. Therefore, the
Men-Zhang had only recently established themselves in this part of the Tibetan plateau at that time.
Nothing more is known of the nature and outcome of this yon-mchod relation, but it seems that Rin-
chen tshul-khrims was able to exercise a predominant role locally with the help of the Men-Zhang. It would
thus ensue that the "three communities of the Men-Zhang" held considerable power in Kyid-grong during
that period. There are no clues as to the structure of secular power in 12th century skyid-grong and, in
particular, the relation between rgyal-bu Jo-sras or his successors (if they ever existed) and the Men-Zhang
sde-gsum. Like rgyal-bu Jo-sras himself, it seems quite likely that the Men-Zhang were under the power of
Gung-thang, as is indicated by the literary material concerning them. This material documents that the Men-
Zhang were among the earliest communities (called mi-sde sgo-bzhi) which bowed to Gung-thang and
formed its political and social backbone (Vitali, "Nomads of Byang and mNga-ris-smad" p. 1025-1026)
(see above n. 58).
The time frame of the yon-mchod relation between the Men-Zhang and Rin-chen tshul-khrims seems
to be from around the end of the 12th century to sometime in the early 13th, for 'Jam-dbyangs chen-po was
a disciple of bla-ma Zhang (1121-1193 or 1194) and Rin-chen tshul-khrims was the former's son. This
confirms what is amply documented in the sources on the sTod Tshal-pa (Mar-lung pa'i rnam-thar, Deb-
ther dmar-po, Chos-legs-kyi rnam-thar and Tshal Gung-thang-gi dkar-chag): that the relations between the
Tshal-pa and the Men-Zhang developed in the early period of Tshal-pa history.
There is another interesting statement in the same passage of Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi rnam-thar that
Rin-chen tshul-khrims went to found a temple at mThong-mon, presently in the territory of Nepal, which
seems to indicate that, in antiquity (and more precisely at least at the end of the 12th or in the early 13th
century), the Tibetan world extended further to the south than at present. It is confirmed by the record that
a branch of the Khang-gsar-ba belonging to the Byang-chub gling-pa family moved to mThong-mon to form
the local bla-ma lineage.99
56. Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi mnam-thar (p. 400 line 6): "His son was Rin-chen tshul-khrims. He founded dGon-chung
Ka-ru at Gra and various people who gave offerings were the yon-bdag. He received an invitation from Mu-kha and
founded 'Ga-Ihang dgon-pa".
57. rTen-gsum gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag (f. 4a lines 3-5): "His exalted son Rin-chen tshul-khrims became a master of all
the mDo-rGyud texts. After he was invited by the Bong-tshogs lung-pa, he was sponsored [by them). He became
the master (bdag-po) of Mon-Zhang sde-gsum ("the three communities of Mon-Zhang", sic for Men-Zhang). He
founded several dgonſ-pa and) holy places. Having been offered [by the Mon-Zhang sde-gsum) many estates [and]
provisions such as seven fields, which, by cultivating [them] (sbad-pa sic for 'bad-pa), give [good crops, he was
asked to own grasslands, mountains and rivers, altogether three".
Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi rnam-thar (p. 440 line 6-p. 401 line 1): "[Rin-chen tshul-khrims) became the bla-ma of all
the people of Bong-tshogs lung-pa. (p. 401) At mThong-smon, he founded a dgon-pa known as bKra-shis-sgang.
He became the lord of Mon-Zhang bde-gsum". Both sources also document the patronage of the Bong-tshogs lung-
pa, who had supported Man-ston two generations earlier.
58. See Vitali, "Nomads of Byang and mNga'-ris-smad. A Historical Overview of Their Interaction in Gro-shod,
"Brong-pa, Glo-bo and Gung-thang from the 11th to the 15th Century", in H. Krasser, M.T. Much, E. Steinkellner,
H. Tauscher (eds.), Tibetan Studies, vol. II, (Proceedings of the International Association of Tibetan Studies, Gratz
1995), Verlag der Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Vienna 1997.
59. Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kyi rnam-thar (f. 4a line 4): "Among the Khang-gsar-ba descendance, one [line] went to
Rong mThong-smon to be the mchod-gnas. This lineage, composed of many bla ma who showed many [signs of
their sadhana, still exists there",



Historiographical Material on Early skyid-grong
301
The south-ward extension of the Tibetan-speaking world is directly linked with the ancient territorial
concept of Bal-Bod, which is a particularly difficult notion to define, given that the extension of Bal-po (the
Kathmandu Valley) did not correspond with that of modern Nepal. Hence, the indication that m Thong-smon,
which is well inside the present Nepali border, was Tibetan in antiquity seems to be meaningful in this
respect.
It is a pity that Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kyi rnam-thar does not specify the names of Khang-gsar-ba
members of mThong-sm.on and does not give any clue to the period in which this transfer took place. One
can probably assume that it occurred quite early, but with no way to tell which of the two ('Jam-dpal gling-
pa or Khang-gsar-ba) came first.
I will conclude this discussion with a summary of the events in the history of the two families.
A bird's-eye view of the history of the Byang-chub gling-pa would be that its eminent members
migrated to dBus at an unspecified date before the construction of bSam-yas. After the temple was
completed, they returned home. The history of the family until the 13th century is rather obscure and is only
enlightened by two major events affecting syid-grong: the visits of Jo-bo-rje A-ti-sha and Sa-pan Kun-dga
rgyal-mtshan (see below).
A bird's-eye view of the history of the Jam-dpal gling-pa genealogy would be that its most eminent
members were active in dBus in the time of the chos-rgyal mes-dhon rnam-gsum and served the successive
throne holders of the lha-sras btsan-po dynasty (probably until its final downfall). They moved to mNga'-
ris skor-gsum at an unspecified time (supposedly in the retinue of syid-lde Nyi-ma-mgon, although this is
doubtful) before proceeding to sKyid-grong in the early 12th century, when Man-ston Sangs-rgyas went first
to Gung thang and then Mang-yul. The ancestral seat of the family was established by the same Man-ston
and its temple by his nephew 'Jam-dbyangs chen-po, who was a Tshal-pa bka-brgyud-pa.
sKyid-grong in the time of Sa-skya pandi-ta's visit and thereafter
The third major personage, after Srong-btsan sgam-po and Jo-bo A-ti-sha, to leave an indelible sign on the
history of Kyid-grong was Sa-skya pandi-ta Kun-dga' rgyal-mtshan who famously encountered and
defeated the Brahmanists there. This episode is recounted in many sources which do not originate from
sKyid-grong, and is a classic of the Sa-skya-pa literature. The material concerning Sa-pan in local sources
neglects his assistant in defeating the mu-stegs-pa, the less famous but equally important grub-thcb mDar-
phyar, but introduces the members of the local families who interacted with the Sa-skya-pa master. Both the
Grwa 'Jam-dpal gling-pa and the gNas Byang-chub gling-pa offered their services and received teachings
when Sa-pan, aged fifty-nine at that time, came to skyid-grong in iron rat 1240 (bs Tan-rtsis gsal-ba 'i nvin-
byed p. 146 line 20-p. 147 line 3). Of the two sons of Rin-chen tshul-khrims, bla-chen Nyi-ma (a monk) was
the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa who met Sa-pan. The master gave him a prophecy, which is behind the name Jam-
dpal gling-pa, saying that some incarnations of 'Jam-dpal would appear among his successors. From then
on, the family was named 'Jam-dpal gling-pa, which came to identify the branch of the clan known as m os
settled in sKyid-grong. The name 'Jam-dpal bde-chen-gling was given to the family temple. The sources
entirely omit the identification of the temple which received its definitive name from Sa-pan. Following the
clue that dGon-chung Ka-ru was the Grwa-pa rtsa-ba-can ("the root of the Grwa-pa") (see above), the
present author is inclined to believe that this temple was the object of Sa-pan's prophecy.
60. rTen-gsum gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag (f. 4a line 5-f. 4b line 3): "The elder of the two sons born to him was bla-chen
Nyi-ma. During his time, chos-kyi rgyal-po Sa-skya pandi-ta (f. 4b) came to sKyid-grong. When he defeated the
mu-stegs-pa, [bla-chen Nyi-ma) offered him a golden Bum, (other) innumerable offerings, and was able to render
him uncompromising service. He therefore received profound teachings on mDo-Ngags (from Sa-pan). At the
assembly for the celebration after the defeat of the mu-stegs, chos-kyi rgyal-po Sa-pan said: "In your family there
will be many rays of light. They will be incarnations of 'Jam-dbyangs". He gave a prophecy advising to give the
name 'Jam-dpal bde-chen-gling to the dgon-pa. Likewise [this family is known as 'Jam-[dpal] gling-pa". This is
confirmed by both Blo-gros chos-'phel-gvi rnam-thar (p. 283 line 6-p. 284 line 3) and Ngag-dbang ve-shes-kyi
ram-thar (p. 401 lines 2-4).



302
Roberto Vitali
The section on the Tshal-pa bka'-brgyud in Deb-ther dmar-po's (found almost verbatim in Tshal Gung-
thang-gi dkar-chag) attributes the foundation of 'Jam-dpal-gling to an unnamed disciple of Zhang Nyag 'Bri-
ra-ba. The latter master is unfamiliar to me,62 but he must have hailed from south Byang-thang, where the
nomadic clan of Nyag is documented some time after the establishment of 'Jam-dpal-gling. The term zhang
seems to have honorific implications, but can also be read as the clan name Zhang, thus addressing the Zhang
or better Men-Zhang nomads of southern Byang-thang mentioned above, who were predominant over the
latter territory as far south as sKyid-grong. The documents presently available on the southern Byang-thang
nomads do not confirm the existence of kinship relations between the Men-Zhang and the Nyag.
The activities of 'Jam-dbyangs chen-po (or alternatively, but less probably, Rin-chen tshul-khrims) in
sKyid-grong, and especially his other religious foundations do not correspond with those of the unnamed
disciple of Zhang Nyag 'Bri-ra-ba. However, this allusion to the foundation of 'Jam-dpal-gling is too
coincidental to avoid the suggestion that 'Jam-dbyangs chen-po was a disciple not only of Zhang g. Yu-brag-
pa but also of Zhang Nyag 'Bri-ra-ba.
Two members of the Byang-chub gling-pa, Khang-ston 'Od-zer rgyal-mtshan and his brother Do-rje
rgyal-mtshan (who were the sons of 'Bum-dar together with rDo-rje rgyal-po), met Sa-skya pandi-ta and
invited him to gNas. They received teachings and were granted an extraordinary statue to be the protector
of their lineage.64 This is the same episode referred to above which led to the appointment of mGon-po as
the Byang-chub gling-pa chos-skyong.
Finally, Nyi-ma's younger brother, du-dben Shes-rab dbang-phyug, is also briefly discussed in the local
documents. It is doubtful that he was a brother of bla-chen Nyi-ma, like the sources say, for he assisted the
Gung-thang king 'Bum-lde-mgon in the establishment of the glang-gi las-stabs bcu-gsum,es in the years
1277-1280, whereas Nyi-ma met Sa-pan in 1240. Further, Shes-rab dbang-phyug is credited to have
61. Deb-ther dmar-po (p. 147 lines 9-13) and Tshal Gung-thang-gi dkar-chag (f. 26b line 6-f. 27a line 1): "Zhang Nyag
'Bri-ra-ba's disciple founded Zhol-bu'i dgon-pa. Since 'Or-ma, Ron and Gung-thang became his sponsors, there
was an extensive contribution in favour of the people to be trained. In sKyid-grong too, he founded both the
monastery of 'Jam-dpal-gling (f. 27a) and Rin-po-che sPungs-pa, and built a khag-ni'i mchod-rten at 'Or-ma'i sa-
'gag ("the 'Or-ma gorge")".
62. Deb-ther dmar-po (p. 133 line 19) includes 'Bri-ra-ba among Sangs-rgyas-'bum's disciples.
63. See Vitali, The Kingdoms of Gu.ge Pu.hrang (n. 713), where a passage from gNyos lHa-nang-pa'i rnam-thar
referring to the Nyag in 1224 is quoted, and ibid. (p. 428-430) for a discussion of gNyag (spelled as) appearing in
mNga'-ris rgyal-rabs (p. 77 line 16).78
64. Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kyi mnam-thar (f. 3b lines 5-7): "Khang-ston 'Od-zer rgyal-mtshan and his brother invited
chos-rje Sa-skya pandi-ta to gNas Byang-chub-gling, who went to see the skyid-grong Jo-bo when he defeated the
Brahmanist "Phrog-byed dga'-bo ("worshipper of Hindu gods"). Since he remained (here] many months, he
thoroughly imparted Tantric commentaries on bDel-mchog), dGe [Kye-rdor?) [and] yo-ga, and instructions on
them. Chos-rje-pa was glad and said: "Though I have many disciples, since I gave instructions on bDec-mchog).
dGe (Kye-rdor?] [and] yo-ga, altogether three, to 'Od-zer rgyal-mtshan and his brother, I entreat you to benefit the
teachings as much as possible. Likewise, since you need an especially (powerful) bstan-srung in order to control
this borderland, I offer you the statue of a chos-skyong for this purpose". He gave him a stone in which mGon-po
had actually dissolved". Some curious episodes show that other people from sKyid-grong took an interest in this
statue and wanted to secure it for themselves (ibid. f. 4a lines 1-2: "The extraordinary image of mGon-po was taken
away twice to Sher by the dge-'dun Sher-pa. The first time, on the way, the statue came back while those who were
carrying it were sleeping. The second time, it was placed in the Sher-pa'i mgon-khang. When it was put (there), the
door was locked. It is well known to everybody that it came back during night time and went to Byang-chub-
gling"). An indication of the location of Sher comes from 'Phags-pa Wa-ti 'i rnam-thar (f. 24a lines 5-6) which says:
"(Coming] from the gtsug-lag-khang (of the) self-originated (statue), between Lan-'de and Gyal-nags, at Sher is
Gyes-phug ("the cave of separation") where Bal-mo-za bid farewell and separated [from her people]; and Gu-ru-
phug the holy place of Guru". Hence, the statue did not travel far.
65. rTen-gsum bzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag (f. 46 lines 3-4): "When the glang-gi las-thabs of 'Bum-Ide-mgon were
established, the younger brother du-dben Shes-rab dbang-phyug actually helped him to achieve this goal]". See
also Ngag-dbang ve-shes-kyi rnam-thar (p. 401 lines 4-5).



Historiographical Material on Early sKyid-grong
303
accompanied this king's son and successor, Khri-lde-'bum, to the Yuan court to meet Ol-ja-du (on the throne
1294-1307) and receive a seal from him, which makes it more unlikely that the two were actual brothers
unless one envisages a conspicuous difference in age between them.66
The reason for concluding with the visit of Sa-pan, or in its aftermath, is that there is a lengthy gap in
the lineages of both the families of skyid-grong after Sa-pan's wondrous defeat of the Brahmanists (e.g. the
documents on the 'Jam-dpal gling-pa agree in stating that this gap extended for six generations). For reasons
not apparent from the sources, the gap seems to mark an historical divide in the lineal succession of these
noble families, thus bringing a long phase in their history to end.
Bibliography
Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kyi mnam-thar: Chos-dbyings rdo-rje, Je-btsun bla-ma dam-pa rDo-rje-'chang kun-
mkhyen O-rgyan Ngag-dbang ye-shes dpal-bzang-po'i rnam-thar dpag-bsam ljon-shing, in bka'-
brgyud ser-phreng chen-mo, vol. III, Ngawang Gyaltsen and Ngawang Lungtok eds., Dehradun 1970.
mChims Nam-mkha-grags, Jo-bo dpal-ldan A-li-sha'i mam-thar rgyas-pa, in Kadam Pacho Part One,
Sikkim Research Institute of Tibetology, Gangtok 1977.
rTen-gsum gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag: Blo-gros chos-'phel, rTen-gsum gzhengs-pa'i dkar-chag bzhugs,
manuscript.
Deb-ther dmar-po: Tshal-pa Kun-dgardo-rje, Deb-ther dmar-po, Dung-dkar Blo-bzang 'phrin-las ed, and
comment., Mi-rigs dpe-skrun-khang, Beijing 1981.
gNas-rnying skyes-bu rnams-kyi rnam-thar (also known as Gyen-tho chen-mo): bSwi-gung nyams-med Rin-
chen, skyes-bu dam-pa rnams-kyi rnam-par thar-pa rin-po-che'i gter-mdzod ces-bya-ha gzhugs-so,
xylograph.
'Phags-pa Wa-ti'i rnam-thar: Maitri-ba-dzra, 'Phags-mchog sPyan-ras-gzigs dbang-phyug Wa-ti'i hzang-
po'i rnam-thar nam-mkha'i nor-bu ma-rig-pa'i mun-sel zhes-bya-ba hzhugs-so, xylograph.
Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kyi mnam-thar: mKhas-grub chen-po Byams-pa phun-tshogs-kyi mnam-thar ngo-
mtshar snang-ba'i nyin-byed yid-bzhin nor-bu dgos-'dod kun-'byung dad-pa'i gsol-'debs bzhugs-so,
xylograph.
Blo-gros chos-'phel-gyi mam-thar: Chos-dbyings rdo-rje, dPal-ldan bla-ma rdo-rje 'dzin-pa Blo-gros chos-
'phel-gyi mam-par thar-pa mdo-tsam-du brjod-pa dri-med baidurya'i 'od-snang, in bka-brgyud ser-
phreng chen-mo, vol. III, Ngawang Gyaltsen and Ngawang Lungtok eds., Dehradun 1970.
sBa-bzhed: sBa gSal-snang, sBa-bzhed, mGon-po rgyal-mtshan ed., Mi-rigs dpe-skrun-khang, Beijing
reprint 1982.
Myang chos-"byung: Anonymous, Myang-yul stod-smad-bar gsum-gyi ngo-mtshar gtam-gyi legs-bshad
mkhas-pa'i 'jug-ngogs zhes-bya-ba bzhugs-so, IHag-pa tshe-ring ed., Bod-ljongs mi-dmangs dpe-
skrun-khang, IHa-sa 1983.
Tshal Gung-thang-gi dkar-chag: 'Phrin-las mam-rgyal, Gung-thang dpal-gvi gtsug-lag-khang byung-rabs
dang bcas-pa'i dkar-chag 'gro-mgon zhal-lung bdud-rtsil chu-rgyun zhes-bya-ba hzhugs-so,
xylograph.
Vitali R, The Kingdoms of Gu.ge Pu.hrang According to mNga'ris rgyal.rabs by Gu.ge mkhan.chen
Ngag.dbang grags.pa, Tho.ling gtsug.lag.khang lo.gcig.stong 'khor.ba'i rjes dran.mdzad sgo'i go.sgrig
tshogs.chung Publishers, Dharamsala 1996.
66. Ngag-dbang ye-shes-kvi rnam-thar (p. 401 lines 4-6): "[Shes-rab dbang-phyug) assisted ['Bum-Ide-mgon's son
Khri-lde-'bum, when the latter went to China, in obtaining the seal of the seven continents (dam-ka gling-hdun).
Having become the bdag-rkyen ("superior") of the [various) dpon of the rgya-mitsho (sic for brgwa-tsho [hcu-
gsum]), he offered to the self-originated Wa-ti) ritual implements such as gold and silver butterlamps". See also
Ten gsum bzhengs pa'i dkar chag (f. 46 lines 4-5). Gung-thang-gi gdung-rabs (p. 112 line 14-p. 113 line 7)
identifies the Yuan emperor in Ol-ja-du. The meeting must have taken place before 1307 when Ol-ja-du died



A HITHERTO UNKNOWN VERSION OF THE
PRAJNA-PĀRAMITA-RATNA-GUNA-SAMCAYA-GĀ THA
M
ANI
a
Akira Yuyama
Prefatory
It was in September 1979 that I visited China with a group of Japanese specialists in literature, history and art
headed by Professor Osamu TAKADA. On my visit to the Turfan Prefectural Exhibition Hall [a] I was greatly
surprised to see a tiny fragment exhibited in a showcase. I was extremely excited to learn of a blockprint text
of the Prajñā-pāramitā-ratna-guna-samcaya-gāthā (abbr. Rgs hereinafter) in Sanskrit alone. The caption given
before the glass showcase described it in Chinese as "A Buddhist sutra in the 'Phags-pa language printed in the
Yuan dynasty (1280-1368 CE), discovered at 'Thousand-Buddha Cave' of Bezeklik" [b].
Chinese Blockprint Texts from Peking
Unfortunately, I had no time to study it with care. My repeated plea to take it myself or to obtain a photo of
the Hall was rejected. I proposed that I should send my research results for them to use in any way they
wished. At least I entreated to be allowed to correct their caption. In the first place I had the impression that
the fragment was no other than one of the so-called Peking Street-edition. My immediate thought was that
it was probably the one printed in the famed Lamaist Temple Song-zhu-si, alias Fa-yuan-si (c), founded in
the fifty-first year of Emperor Kang-xi (1654-1722, reigned 1661-1722) of the Qing dynasty, i.e. 1712 CE,
in Peking
This monastery has long been famous for its publications of multilingual literature, particularly bilingual
texts in the Lan-tsha (or Rañjana) and Tibetan Dbu-can scripts printed parallel on every other line. A number
of these texts are in the Oriental Collection of the Australian National University Library. One of them is a
copy of the Diamond Sutra, which was formerly in the possession of the late Professor Xu Di-shan (Taiwan
1893-Hong Kong 1947). He is also well known to us as a writer "Mr. Peanut" (d), and further as the de facto
editor of the meticulous index to the Chinese Buddhist Canon. It is unfortunate that the latter is not more
widely known in the field of Buddhist studies [e]. He wrote the preface on 30 May 1933 at Yenching
University (Vol. I, p. iii).
Nevertheless, Xu Di-shan has left an important note on the first page of this blockprint text of the
Diamond Sutra that it is a copy of the Peking Song-zhu-si edition. His note is dated September 16, i.e. 1927
CE [f]. Incidentally, I have little knowledge of a large collection of the Peking Street-editions with the
exception of that of the late Professor Shiro (alias Shinten) SAKAI of Koyasan. He has made a brief but
comprehensive note on his private collection in the Reports of the Japanese Association for Tibetan Studies,
No. 3 (Osaka 1956), p. 1a-3b.
One may easily recall a Peking blockprint bilingual Rgs text (Sanskrit and Tibetan). Several copies are
known to exist throughout the world: St. Petersburg, Berlin, Canberra, Kyoto, London and Sendai. A nice
photomechanical reproduction has fortunately appeared. A copy kept in the State Library of Berlin was
brought back by Erich Haenisch during his stay in Peking in 1928-1929. It is quite possible that he had
obtained it at the Song-zhu-si in 1929 (cf. Yuyama, Rgs4, p. xxvii). It may be added here that the young
Berthold Laufer (1874-1934) paid a visit to the Song-zhu-si during his expedition to Peking towards the end
of the nineteenth century and recorded it in his enlightening article on Mongolian literature.
This print bears the "Shen" character of the Thousand-Character Numerals [g]. It gives a Sanskrit text
in the Lañ-tsha script, with a transliteration and translation underneath in the Tibetan Dbu-can script. As a
matter of fact, the so-called Recension B edited by E. Obermiller is based upon this very blockprint text. P.
L. Vaidya has published another edition of Recension B. He says that it is based on a single manuscript in
Baroda. In this paper I will not repeat the problems posed by various recensions in Indic, Tibetan and



A Hitherto Unknown Version of the Prajñā-pāramitā-ratna-guna-samcaya-gatha
305
Chinese. In short, however, Recension A of the Indic is represented by a single manuscript kept in the Asiatic
Society of Calcutta (cf. Yuyama, Rgsa, "Bibliographical Notes," p. xxiii-lxxii). It was first revealed to great
excitement through the painstaking efforts of Edward Conze and then grammatical studies by
Franklin Edgerton,
The blockprint fragment in question was exhibited ninety degrees turned the wrong way round. This
must be the reason why it was thought to be a text written in the 'Phags-pa script. This misunderstanding had
certainly led them think that it belonged to the Yuan period, which is normally placed from 1271 till 1368
CE. As a matter of fact, the caption mentions not the 'Phags-pa script but 'Phags-pa language. Unfortunately,
this fatal mistake is still frequently seen among Orientalists. The 'Phags-pa"script" does belong to the Indo-
Tibetan family of scripts. It does not indicate a language nor a word or a sentence. Therefore, it can represent
the sounds of any language.
Incidentally, the early history of printing in China has been meticulously discussed. The Buddhists must
not have been indifferent towards the advancement of printing in general at the beginning of the eighteenth
century, e.g. imperial printers like Cao Yin [h] (1658-1712).
Place of Discovery
It is therefore very unlikely that this fragment could have been discovered at the Bezeklik caves. If the
discovery place were in this region, it is quite possible that the fragment was unearthed in the remains of a
temple in a village named Sängim (Sheng-jin in Chinese) (i) in the vicinity of the caves. It is well known
that modern western expeditions have discovered Indic materials there.
In the meanwhile I had had to give up my idea of studying this fragment of immense interest. Towards
the end of 1981 I was browsing through the bookshelves of a library without any specific aim. As a matter
of blind chance I found a photograph of the very blockprint same text covering two facing pages in a book
published by a Chinese-born Japanese cameraman named Kafuku Seki (or Shi Jia-fu) (). The photo is
inserted as it was exhibited in the Turfan Hall. In a dialogue with the late Professor Akiyasu ToDo who
envoys a worldwide reputation in Chinese linguistics in particular he gave it as an undeciphered non-
Chinese document unearthed from the grave hordes of Astāna: Tenzan Nanro-o Yuku (Tokyo 1979) [k], p.
30-31. It seems more doubtful to me to site Astäna as the place of its discovery than Bezeklik.
In any case I should like to express my sincere gratitude to Mr. Kafuku SEKI, whose precious photograph
has made it possible for me to work on the fragment. It is however still a great pity that I have been unable
to see the original again or to obtain a better photocopy. Some writings in small letters are illegible. In this
blockprint text these letters are found at the end of verses.
'Phags-pa Script / Lan-tsha Script
Since the fragment was taken as a text written in the 'Phags-pa script, it must naturally belong to the Yuan
period. The 'Phags-pa script is so well known as it was called after the name of its deviser, i.e. 'Gros-mgon
'Phags-pa Blo-gros Rgyal-mtshan Dpal-bzang po, or Aryanatha Matidhvajasribhada in Indic form (1235-
1280 CE). In the year 1269 he was ordered as the National Preceptor, later Imperial Preceptor, by Khubilai
Khan (1216-1294), to devise a new script for the Mongol Empire. The Lañ-tsha, or Ranjana script, has been
popular until today among Buddhists in the Himalayan region in particular.
As a matter of fact, the Lamaist scholars in China were not at all indifferent to foreign scripts. In this
connection one may easily recall a well-known concise encyclopaedic work Rgpa-dkar-nag rgya-ser kaśmi-
ra bal bod hor-gvi yi-ge dang dpe-ris rnam-grangs mang-ba by Arya Pandita Ngag-dbang-blo-bzang-bstan-
pa'i rgyal-mtshan in the eighteenth century CE. In fact, this most interesting text was printed in Peking
Fortunately, this was photomechanically reprinted some twenty years ago. There are a number of similar
texts printed by blocks in the same manner in Peking. They are all to be found in the same book by
Lokesh Chandra.



306
Akira Yuyama
A Hitherto Unknown Blockprint Text - A Third Indie Version?
Even such a small piece of blockprint fragment preserved at Turfan offers quite a few interesting and
important variant readings. It is now not really difficult to reconstruct the text in comparison with the other
versions extant in Sanskrit, Tibetan and Chinese: Rgs XIV verses 4-8. It is therefore eagerly hoped that this
remaining blockprint text will appear before us in the near future. To my knowledge, I have so far seen no
report as to the existence of this same blockprint.
The blockprint texts produced at Lamaist temples like Song-zhu-si in Peking seem to be all in Indo-
Tibetan pothi-type. But the photograph of the fragment in question looks like an accordion-type print. On
the upper part of the fragment are seen handwritten Chinese characters "eleven obverse," i.e. 11a [1]. This
handwritten memorandum-type pagination may by itself mean that the text is folded like an accordion
printed without pagination, neither a pothi nor a scroll. Incidentally, this numbering is written correctly as
one reads the main text. In the showcase it was placed half upside down.
Therefore it is again a great pity that I was not allowed to see and handle the fragment itself and that the
photograph does not tell if it had a reverse side with a printed text. The photographer does not mention it in
the book. And the paper may have been thick enough not to allow the printing ink to soak through from the
back page. Any Tibetologist has the experience of difficulty in reading the prints whose sheets are soaked
with ink from the back page and vice versa. If the reverse side of the text were printed, it would no doubt
offer important readings we could not overlook.
The text runs from our la to the following page without interruption. The size of the fragment is
unknown. I was naturally unable to measure it. However, since the last word of 11a, prāpunāli (XIV 6b end),
continues to the next page with the beginning of the next pāda, tan caiva (XIV 6c) and one line of the page
contains about one and half pādas. The book itself is not really a large accordion folio. The rectangular page
consisting most probably of six lines uses a pothi-type form, that is to say, not printed in a western style.
Prajñā-päramitā-ratna-guna-samcaya-gātha XIV 4-8
In 1984 I reported this fragment in a commemorative volume for Professor Akira HIRAKAWA: Problems in
Buddhist Thought (Tokyo 1985), p. 443-453 (in Japanese) [m]. There I gave a Romanized text with a
reconstructed text and a translation. The present paper intends to be a largely revised English version,
employing more materials in the hope that it will draw much greater attention.
On this occasion I wish to give a faithfully transliterated text, and a reconstructed text with textual notes,
variant readings found in Recensions A and B, and its Tibetan and Chinese versions. My original plan to
present a provisional translation of each version had to be abandoned due to lack of time and space. Edward
Conze has made an English translation from the Indic running parallel to the Aşrasähasrikā (abbrev. Asp
hereinafter). To be frank, although we cannot forget his untiring service, it is a translation made out of the
Indo-Tibetan versions. Despite its title, Conze has given the Rgs in the first place followed by the ASP. After
all, he has not settled the question of the relation between the Rgs and Asp.
Unfortunately, a photograph of the fragment is not at my disposal for reproduction. Those who are
interested in it are requested to consult the book by Kafuku SEKI mentioned above, although some portions
in small letters are regrettably illegible, as shown ((...)) in my transliterated text below. Let us hope to see
a better copy published by those prudent scholars in charge of such items of our common cultural heritage!
Special Features of the Blockprint Text
This blockprint fragment, though small, offers undoubtedly remarkable features. I herewith cite some
interesting phrases and words. Some other interesting readings are treated below.
Verse 6c: parigrhnayimānu, nom.sg. masc, of pres.pple. to non-causative grhayati, is worth noting from the
grammatical point of view. For the nom.sg.ma., ending in -1, see Edgerton, BHSGr 88.20, Yuyama, RgsGr
$8.8; cf. Recension A grhnayamānu and B-grhnayamāna. One may also compare it with BHS
*grhnayiyana-, pple. (see Edgerton, BHSG $34.5), *grhnayita-, pple. (see Edgerton, BHSG $34.8), and
possibly "grhwayitavya, gdve. (Edgerton, BHSGr $34.20).



A Hitherto Unknown Version of the Prajñā pāramitā-ratna-guna-samcaya-gäthä
307
Verse 6d (end): bodhim agryäm is the most exciting example. In both Recensions A and B read agra-
bodhim, which is a fixed form at the end of the lines of verses. The reading bodhim agryām is an
admirably beautiful ending for a verse, perfect in grammar and refreshing in metre! Such an alteration of
phrases could not occur just by mistake, how much less through poetical ignorance. The composer must
certainly have had a talent for prosody.
Verse 7b: vila/yam uplaiti, "approaches destruction, breaks, is broken, is damaged": my first reading
vila/yam prayāſti], as in Rec.A, may have to be corrected here, since the sign "ai" on top of the missing
"p" can be read. If so, our fragment agrees with Recension B here, not with A! Manuscripts of Recension
B read vilayam upaiti (Obermiller-Vaidya) is unmetrical! It must read vilayam, m.c.! This is another
good instance where our fragment agrees with Recension B, and not A.
Verse 7d: -samangi, nom.sg.fem., with nāva, "a ship." fem., in 7c, is supported by Recension A, but not by
B samagram (see Yuyama, RgsA p. 56 ad 7d). This reading is also to be noted in view of the
textual transmission.
Verse 8b: bodhi (= Rec. A & B), abl., as attested by Tibetan byang-chub-las-ni, may have been degraded
metrically from the ablative bodhe / bodheh (cf. Yuyama, RgsGr $10.21). In his edition, printed in
Devanagari, Vaidya may have intended the reading bodhim, followed by upaiti hānim, as bodhi-m- with a
hiatus-bridger -m-. Otherwise, it does not make sense. Incidentally, bodhi- is frequently used in the
feminine gender in addition to the masculine (cf. Edgerton, BHSD p. 402a, 4.v.). In our text are found a
number of feminine forms (cf. Yuyama, RgsGr $6.27, e.g. Rgs.A I 160 bodhim ... asanga-bhūtänt; VII 5d
bodhi śāntā (accusatives); XIV 4d paramādbhutām sugata-bodhi; XVI 3b nānālva-dharma-vigatām
bodhim: XIX 4c bodhir iyam (but with utpattito, masc.!): XXXI 2c bodhim uttama-śivām.
The above examples, though only a few in number, are good enough to suggest the existence of a third Indic
version, if not a recension. In any case this chapter XIV is one I like very much. The famous parable of
"aupamya" is indeed nicely composed.
Transliterated Text
The small letters illegible on the photo shown as ((...)) below are found only at the end of every verse. They
may therefore indicate the verse numbers. Each line of the first folio of the fragment (Seki, op.cit., p. 31)
reads as follows:
(1) [...]r[igrhātā bhava-svabhāva-kusalla pſa raſmārtha-1
(2) [...Jna-sambhfta-yāna-pātrā paramädbhutām sugata-bodhi
(3) [...]take apakvi yatha väri baheya ke cij jñātavyu
(4) [...]ti durbalatvāt parli pakvļi vāri ghatake vaha-
(5) [...]bhedanād gayam (w.r. for bhayam) upaiti ca (sva]st[i] geham ((...)) kincăpi
(6)[...]b[a]hulo siya bodhisatvo prajñā-vihinu vilayam laghu prăpunāti
The next folio (Seki p. 30) reads as follows:
(1) tan caiva sraddhu parigrhnayimānu prajñā atikramya bhumi-dvaya pră=
(2) psyati bodhim agryyām ((...)) nāvā yathā aparikarma-kſtä samudre vila=
(3) [... Jaiti sa-dha[na] saha vănijebhiḥ sä сaiva nāva parikarma-kſtā
(4) [...]na ca bhidyate dhana-samngi upaiti tīram ((...)) em eva śraddhu-pa-
(5) [...]prajñā-vihinu laghu bodhi upaiti hänim so
(6) [...]mita s[u]y[kto) aks[ato) nupätu [.........]
Reconstructed Text
[ye te bhavanti vara-prajna-pa]r[i]8<g>rhītā
bhava-svabhava-kus[a]la p[a]ra[märtha-darsi /
te punya-jñāna-dhalna-sambhrta-yāna-pātrā
paradbhutam sugata-bodhi (sprśanti sighram // 4 //



308
Akira Yuyama
ghaltake a-pakvi yatha väri vaheya ko cij
jñātavyu [kspru ayu bhetsya]ti durbalatvät/
pa[r]i[pakv]i vāri ghatake vaha]mānu märge
na ca] bhedanād bhayam upaiti ca [sva]st[i] geham // 5 //
kim-cāpi (śraddha-]b[a]hulo siya bodhisatvo
prajñā-vihīnu vilayam laghu prāpuņāti /
tam caiva sraddhu parigrhnayimānu prajña
atikramya bhūmi-dvaya prāpsyati bodhim agryäm // 6 //
nāvā yathă a-parikarma-krtā samudre
vila[yam upjaiti sa-dha[nā) saha vānijebhiḥ /
să caiva nāva parikarma-kyta (su-yuktā]
na ca bhidyate dhana-samangi upaiti tiram // 7 //
em eva sraddhu-pa[ribhävitu bodhisatvo]
prajña-vihinu laghu bodhi upaiti hānim/
so (caiva prajn-vara-pära]mitā-s[u]yu[kto]
a-ks[ato] 'n-upāhatu (spęśāti jñāna bodhim // 8 // .
Some Other Textual Notes on the Reconstructed Text
For details regarding the variant readings see Yuyama, Rgsa, p. 55 f. (footnotes). Special features seen in
the fragment are discussed above in relation to the complicated problems regarding recensions.
4a. The Tibetan version corresponding to Sanskrit 3cd-4ab is to be found only in the Chinese blockprint text.
At some stage of transmission the verses 3cd-4ab may have gone astray so that are missing from the
corresponding Tibetan versions in all the hitherto known editions and manuscripts. For further details on
the readings see my relevant footnotes in my edition (Yuyama, RgsA p. 55).
4a. pariggrhitā: parigrhº is unmetrical (so also I 6d, XIV 10c, XV 5c, XX 146, XXIX 4c), cf. Yuyama,
Rgs Gr $2.131, Edgerton, BHSGr $2.7, RgsA p. 37. Another possibility is a hyper-Sanskritic form
parigrahitā, as is attested in VII 2a parigrahita, nom.sg.f., to *grahati; also parigrāhika- (cf. Yuyama,
Rgs Gr $32.36, 40.1; but B: ºgrhita, unmetr.!). Needless to say, the second syllable should be short, m.c.!
4b. kusalāh: Rec.B kućalo corresponds to e-darsi, which, however, should be taken as plural (as supported
by in păda a: -pariggrhitā). The same form is attested in XXIV 2b °-darsi. The nom.pl.masc. ending in -
i (of in-stems) is also found in our text: XV 4d -kathi; XVII 2a --bhāni; XVII 4b vrsabhi; XXI 7c, XXXI
2b cari; XXIX 6a -sobhi; XXXI la-abhikānkşi (cf. Yuyama, RgsGr $12.6, Edgerton, BHSGr $10.181).
5a.c. Rec.B paksi (=ed. Obermiller!) does not make sense! It should be emended to ºpakvi, so reads our
fragment apakvi, pariſpakvli, so also A; so Tib. ma btang, Chin. bu jian-lao in 5a [n]; and Tib. btang-
bum-par, Chin. jian-lao in 5c.
Tibetan Versions
The Rgs has played a great role in the history of Tibetan Buddhism. Haribhadra headed the list in this
connection. He has left with us an important commentary on it. In the Indo-Tibetan tradition he has been
quoted as a reviser of the corruptly transmitted text (cf. Yuyama, Rgså, p. xvii-xviii).
It is worth noting here that the text has become the most important basic literature to the Zhi-byed-pa
School founded by Pha-dam-pa Sangs-rgyas from South India in the twelfth century.
As mentioned above, only the Chinese blockprint bilingual text offers the Tibetan version fully
corresponding to the Sanskrit. I have given Tibetan A represented by some Tunhuang manuscripts with
variant readings in a brief comparison with B (Yuyama, Rgs A, p. 172, cf. p. 195). Variant readings found in
Recension B are marked with underlines and noted down in the following paragraph. It is, however, not my
intention to discuss complicated problems of textual history and canonical status. This applies to the Chinese
transmission, too.



A Hitherto Unknown Version of the Prajñā-pāramita-ratna-guna-samcaya-gatha
309
[/ gang de shes-rab mchog-gis yongs-su zin-pa-na/ (4a)
dngos-po'i rang-bzhin mkhas-shing don dam ston-par byed // (4b)
/de-dag thabs-kyi yon-tan shes-rab yongs bzung-ste.
/ mchog-tu rmad byung bde-gshegs byang-chub myur-du reg // 4 //
/dper-na la-las rdza-so ma btang chu skyed-na /
nyam-chung phyir-ni myur-du jig-par rig-par bya //
7 so btang bum-par chu skyed lam-du 'jig-pa-yi /
/'jigs-pa med-cing bde-bar khyim-du phyin-par 'gyur // 5 //
/ gzhan-yang byang-chub-sems-dpal dad-pa mang gyur-kyang
/ shes-rab mam-par nyams-na myur-du 'jig-par 'gyur //
dad-pas shes-rab de-ni yongs-su zin gyur-na /
/ sa gnyis shin-tu 'das-te byang-chub mchog thob 'gyur // 6 //
/dper-na bcos legs ma byas gru-ni rgya-mtsho'i nang /
/nor dang bcas-shing tshong-par bcas-te 'jig-par 'gyur //
/gru de legs-par bcos legs byas dang ldan gyur-na /
/ mi 'jig nor dang bcas-par (v.1.0-te) ngogs-su phyin-par 'gyur // 7 //
/de-Itar byang-chub-sems-dpa' dad-pas yongs bsgos-kyang /
/ shes-rab med-na byang-chub-las-ni myur nyams 'gyur //
/de-nyid shes-rab pha-rol phyin-pa mchog Idan-na /
/ marmas (v.l. smas) ma nyams rgyal-ba'i byang-chub reg-par 'gyur // 8 //
Variant Readings in Recension B
4ab. As mentioned above, this is found only in the bilingual Chinese blockprint text.
4c. A bzung-ste: B zin-na.
5c. A jig-pa-yi (some-pa'i, unmetr.): B v.1.0-pa-yis.
6a. A gzhan-yang: B de-bzhin.
6b. A nyams-na ... yig-par ... : B nyams-shing (v.l. o-na)... ma-rungs ... : cf. Skt. o-vihinu vilayam ...
60. A dad-pas shes-rub de-ni: B de-bas shes-rab-kyis-ni (v.l. shes-rab de-ni).
8d. AB rmas (v.l. smas; Bw.r. smras!)!
8d. A reg-par: B v.1. (a Tunhuang MS) sems-dpar!
Mongolian Versions
The Mongolian versions are preserved as a Kanjur text, Chinese blockprints and probably as Dharani texts
(cf. Yuyama, Rgs A, p. xliv-xly). I regret very much that I have not been able to study them firsthand, for,
when young, I formed the mistaken opinion that Mongolian Buddhist literature, particularly those in the
Kanjur, was a mere copy of the Tibetan. I lament my ignorance of the Mongolian language.
In recent years a Japanese Mongolist, Koichi HIGUCHI of Ehime University in Matsuyama, has been
working energetically on Mongolian Buddhist literature and shown us its importance in the history of
Buddhism. Being a linguist in the first place, he has demonstrated the existence of three versions of the Rgs,
i.e. A1, A2 and B, in his enlightening article on the Mongolian versions of the Rgs published in the Toyo
Gakuho, LXVII, 1/2 (Tokyo 1987), p. 01(182)-027(156), with an English summary on p. iii [o]. His
meticulous work was thereafter published in book form in 1991 [P]. Incidentally, in a collection of his work
Studies of the influences of the Northeastern Linguistic Situations upon the Mediaeval Mongolian Language
in the 13-14th Centuries (March 1999), v, 100 p. (including a useful bibliography on p. 97-100) (9). Higuchi
has further developed his research into other texts in yet another collection of articles: Studies of
Multilingual Situations in the Mongol Empire Period as Observed in the Loanword System (March 1997),
v, 94 p. (with a useful bibliography on p. 90-94) [r]. They are the Usuișa-vijaya Dhärani, Bhadra-carya-
pranidhana, Manjusri-nāma-sangiti, Saddharma-pundarika, Ratnajali-pariprcchū and Goshgavyäkarana.
Some of them were published in English, and those appeared in the collected works of his research projects



310
Akira Yuyama
for the years 1995-1996 and 1997-1998. His comprehensive work on the Ratnajāli-pariprccha (cf. Ligeti
Catalogue No. 919) has been published in book form (s).
His research results tell us that there must have been several routes, not just one rectilinear course from
India to Mongolia via Tibet. It may not always simply be via Tibet. This interests me a great deal. I am
greatly looking forward to future research work done by such specialists.
Chinese Version
The Chinese version, translated by Fa-xian in 991 CE [t] (cf. Yuyama, RgsA, p. xxxix-xliii), corresponding
to Rgs XIV 4-8, is to be found in Taisho No. 229: Vol. VIII p. 680a13-22. This portion is to be found under
the "List of Sino-Japanese Characters" at the end of this paper (u).
APPENDICES: Hitherto Unknown Rgs Versions
A Hitherto Unknown Blockprint Tibeto-Sinic Text
In his illuminating article "A Brief Survey of the Buddhist Work - Aryaprajñāpāramitāratnagunasamcayagathā
- Both in Tibetan and Chinese" (1983), Luo Zhao reports that he discovered a Tibeto-Sinic bilingual text of
the Rgs in the Peking Office of the famed Yun-ju-si of Fan-shan. It is said to have been translated in the years
between 1140 and 1193, in the Tangut period, and reprinted in 1447, during the Ming dynasty. He claims
that it must be one of the oldest prints of the Tibetan literature [v]. It is a great pity that I have been unable
to check it to see exactly what it is. It may well be a third version both of Tibetan and Chinese! Let us hope
to see it appear in facsimile in the near future!
On the other hand, thanks to the fruit of his exhaustive efforts, we are able to see the Chinese version
(op. cit., p. 17-36). It is interesting that the text begins in the same manner as the Tibetan translations, i.e.
"In Indic it is said: Arya-prajñā-pāramitā-ratna-guna-samcaya-gāthī" in the usual Tantric way of
transliterating Chinese characters, followed by its Chinese translation as is given in the title of his article. In
fact, the Chinese version is quite different from the one translated by Fa-xian, or Tian-xi-zai. It may be worth
noting that this is written all in 11-syllable verses like the Tibetan. It is complete and of great interest. It
naturally needs further investigation. Thus, it may also shed light on problematic portions in Fa-xian's
version, e.g. its Chinese text II 4 (Taisho VIII p. 677c6-8), corresponding to Sanskrit II 6, has been
transmitted in prose!
The fact that the text was found among the Fan-shan materials cannot be ignored in relation to the
history of the Chinese Buddhist Canon. It may contribute to an understanding of the relation between the
so-called "Stone Sutras" and the Qidan (or Ch'i-tan) edition of the Chinese Da-zang-jing [w], and possibly
the Tangut Canon [x]. Herewith I only wish to allude to a notable publication of collected articles on the
Stone Sutras at Fan-shan under the editorship of Professor Yasunori KEGASAWA [y].
A Hitherto Unknown Indic Text from Tibet
On his visit to Tibet Luo Zhan discovered a most interesting Indic Rgs palm-leaf manuscript copied by a
Chinese monk named Punyakirti: cina-desiya-bhikṣu-Punyakiriti. This was first introduced by the grand
savant Ji Xian-lin in his enlightening article on the Rgs (written in May 1988, and now reprinted in his
collected works published from Peking in 1991 and from Taipei in 1995). Among many other illuminating
viewpoints he discusses the first nine verses of Chapter I (Yuyama, Rgs A, p. 8-10) in comparison with the
Chinese version translated by Fa-xian and that found at Fan-shan. It is a great pity that no further details
have been made known to us. Let us hope again to see it appear in some form at no distant date! This may
well be another Indic version [z].



A Hitherto Unknown Version of the Prajñā-pāramita-ratna-guna-samcaya-gatha
311
List of Sino-Japanese Characters
a吐魯番縣展示館:“Turtan Prefectural Exhibition Hall”。
b八思巴文心經印本·元代公元 1280-1368年) · 柏孫克里克千仙洞,
"A Buddhist sutra in the 'Phags-pa language printed in the Yuan dynasty (1280-1368 CE),
discovered at 'Thousand-Buddha Cave of Bäzäklik"
c嵩祝寺/Song-zhu-i /Sung-chu-ssi / 法源(灣 Fa-yuan(yuany-si / Fa-yuan-ssi.
d 許地山/Xi Di-shin/Hsi TT-shan / 落花生“Peanute":
e引得編纂處主任·洪業:引得·第十一號:佛藏子目引得,三冊 北平·燕京大學圖書館)。
f北京嵩祝寺板十六年九月許地山置
g身/ Shen / Shen,
h曹寅/ Cao-m/Tsao Yin,
i Sängim // # (Sheng-jin / Sheng-chin).
j石嘉福(Kafikan SEKI // Shi Jia-hi / Shih Chia-fu)。
k 天山南路往冬之儿口-下 絲綢之路千里(東京・講談社,1982)
1十一上/shi-y shang (shing) / shih-i shang.
加湯山明“梵文宝德截般若木版本断簡”,平川彰博士古稀記念論集·教思想請問題(東京,
春秋社, 1985)
n不堅牢/pu chien-lao / bu jian-lio.
o檐口康一,“『宝德截般若』蒙古語說了”,東洋舉報。
p蒙古語歌『宝德截般若經』仍研究(広島·溪水社,1991).
913-4世紀の東北ユーラシアの言語状況が中期蒙古語に及ぼした影響の研究.
r借用形式に観察されるモンゴル帝国期の多重言語状況の研究,
5 蒙古語歌『宝網紅』O研究(東京·多賀出版,1994).
t *W Fă-xian / Fa-hsien (alias Tian-xi-zāi / T'ien-hsi-tsai).
大正新脩大藏經, No. 229; Vol. VII p. 680a13-22:
若人不赞堅信心依於般若求解脫輪迴海無比期,威生老死常苦惱 (4)
若有信心持般若解有無性見真如是人獲福智有財速證最上佛菩提(5)
如人擔水用坏端如不坚牢速破壞若用坚牢鼎盛水而無破壞無憂怖(6)
不見僧請菩薩 遠般若行求退堕能發信心持般若證大菩提超二地(7)
未有商人欲入海不造堅固大船舫 依堅固船無怖畏 獲多珍寶到彼岸 (8)
v 羅照(Luo Zhao Lo Chao),“藏漢合璧<聖勝慧到彼岸功德寶集偶>考路”,世界宗教研究,
1983年4期,p.436.
W WAR E /Q-dan Da-zang-jing / Ch'i-tan Ta-tsang-ching.
x Tangut (藏項)·西夏/Xi-xia / Xi-xia Hsi-hsia.
y氣賀澤保規(編),中國佛教石經研究 - 房山雲居寺石經查中心(京都,京都大学学術出
版会,1996).
z論梵文本<里勝聽到彼岸功德寶集偈》,文化:中国与世界,第4期(北京:生活 ·讀書,
新知三聯書店,1988) = 季羨林学術論著自選集 北京·北京師範学院出版社,1991), p. 549-
608, esp. p. 553 (61.7);季羨林佛教學術論文集(中華佛學研究所論叢,ID (北京·東初出版
社,1995), p. 211-275, esp. p.215f. $1.7)



312
Akira Yuyama
Notes
1. Cf. Walther Heissig, Die Pekinger lamaistischen Blockdrucke in mongolischer Sprache: Materialien zur
mongolischen Literaturgeschichte (= Göttinger Asiatische Forschungen, II) (Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1954),
pp. 4-6 et passim.
2. Combined indices to the Authors and Titles of Books And Chapters of Buddhist Literature. 3 vols. (= Harvard-
Yenching Institute Sinological inder Series, XI) (Peiping: Offices in Yenching University Library, March 1933),
(vi), xvi, XXV, 266 pp.: (iv), 459 pp.; (iv), 412 pp. Note that Xu Di-shan's preface is dated 30 May 1933!
3. Cf. A. Yuyama, Indic Manuscripts and Chinese Blockprints (Non-Chinese Texts) of the Oriental Collection of the
Australian National University Library, Canberra = Occasional Paper Series, V) (Canberra: Centre of Oriental
Studies, Australian National University, 1967), p. 61.
4. Cf. Prajñā pāramitā-ratna-guna-samcaya-gatha (Sanskrit Recension A), edited with an Introduction,
Bibliographical Notes and a Tibetan Version from Tunhuang by Akira Yuyama (Cambridge / London-New York-
Melbourne: Cambridge University Press, 1976), pp. xxvii-xxviii. - abbrev. "Yuyama, Rgs" hereinafter.
5. Multi-Lingual Buddhist Texts in Sanskrit, Chinese, Tibetan. Mongolian and Manchu, reproduced by Lokesh
Chandra from the Collection of Prof. Raghuvira, VI ( Satapitaka Series, CCLII) (New Delhi: International
Academy of Indian Culture, 1980), pp. 2094-2166. On the margin is found the classification character showing the
number, i.e. "Shen" ( folios 1a-109a). The text corresponding to our fragment appears on pages 2122-2124
(= folios 446-46a).
6. Cf. Manfred Taube, "Zur Textgeschichte einiger gZuns-bsdus-Ausgaben," Zentral-Asiatische Studien, II (1968),
pp. 55-66, esp. p. 55.
7. Berthold Laufer, "Skizze der mongolischen Literatur," Keleti Szemle, VIII (Budapest 1907), pp. 165-261, esp.
p. 187 f. This informative paper has now been carefully reprinted: Kleinere Schriften von Berthold Laufer. Teil I:
Publikationen aus der Zeit von 1894 bis 1910, herausgegeben von Hartmut Walravens = Sinologica Coloniensia,
II) (Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner, 1976), pp. 1120-1216, esp. p. 1142 f.
8. Prajna-pāramita-ratna-guna-samcaya-gatha. Sanskrit and Tibetan Text, edited by E. Obermiller - Bibliotheca
Buddhica, XXIX) (Moscow-Leningrad: USSR Academy of Sciences, 1937) (Photomechanic reprint with a
Sanskrit-Tibetan-English index by Edward Conze (Indo-Iranian Reprints, V) (The Hague: Mouton & Co., 1960),
also reprinted by Biblio Verlag, Osnabrück, 1970, and by the Meicho Fukykai, Tokyo, 1978)}.
9. Mahāyāna-Sutra-Samgraha, I(- Buddhist Sanskrit Texts, XVII) (Darbhanga: Mithila Institute of Post-Graduate
Studies and Research in Sanskrit Learning, 1961), pp. 352-404: Text No. XXII 'Ratnagunasamcayagūthū (with
critical notes).
10. E. Conze, "The Calcutta Manuscript of the Ratnagunasamcayagātha," Indo-Iranian Journal, IV, 1 (1960), pp.
37-58. - abbrev. "Conze, Rgs" hereinafter.
11. F. Edgerton, "The Prajna-Pāramita-Ratna-Guņa-Samcaya-Gätha," Indo-Iranian Journal, V, 1 (1961), pp. 1-18. -
abbrev. "Edgerton, Rgs" hereinafter.
12. See esp. Les débuts de l'imprimerie en Chine (Euvre posthumes de Paul Pelliot, IV) (Paris: Imprimerie Nationale
- Adrien-Maisonneuve, 1953). p. 139: "Appendice: Notes additionnelles sur les éditions imprimées du canon
bouddhique," par Paul Demiéville, ibid., pp. 121-138.
13. Cf. e.g. Eminent Chinese of the Ch'ing Period (1644-1912), edited by Arthur W. Hummel, 2 vols. (Washington:
Government Printing Office / The Library of Congress, 1943-1944), II, pp. 740b-742b, s.v. Ts'ao Yin, esp. p. 741a.
14. See e.g. Sanskrithandschriften aus den Turfanfunden, Teil I. Unter Mitarbeit von Walter Clawiter und Lore
Holzmann herausgegeben und mit einer Einleitung versehen von Emst Waldschmidt (= Verzeichnis der
orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland, X, 1) (Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag GmbH, 1965), pp. XI-XXVI,
esp. p. XV. - cf. Review by A. Yuyama, Indo-Iranian Journal, XII, 4 (1970), pp. 266-269.
15. Cf. e.g. Miyoko Nakano, A Phonological Study in the 'Phags.pa Script and the Mëng-ku tzu-ytin Oriental
Monograph Series, VII) (Canberra: Australian National University Press, 1971) - with an extensive bibliography
regarding various aspects of the script.
16. Cf. Yuyama, Indic Manuscripts and Chinese Blockprints (1967), pp. 84-100, 1051, 114 and 124; Manfred Taube,
Tiberische Handschriften und Blockdrucke, IV (= Verzeichnis der orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland,
XI, 4) (Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner, 1966), p. 1087 f.: Nr. 2929.
17. Indian Scripts in Tiber, reproduced by Lokesh Chandra from the Collection of Prof. Raghuvira (= Satapitaka Series,
CCXCVII) (New Delhi: Mrs. Sharada Rani, 1982), Text No. 4, pp. 26-40; cf. M. Taube, op. cit., I (1966), Tafel VI-
VII (folios 15a, 16a, 196 & 29b).



A Hitherto Unknown Version of the Prajñā-pāramita-ratna-guna-samcaya-gātha
313
18. The Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines & Its Verse Summary, translated by Edward Conze (Bolinas:
Four Seasons Foundation, 1973), pp. 9-73 (Rgs), esp. p. 34 f. (Rgs XIV).
19. I have given a detailed analysis of every metrical scheme in Recension A: A. Yuyama, "Remarks on the Metre of
the Prajna-püramita-ratna-guna-samcaya-gatha," Studies in Indo-Asian Art and Culture, Volume II: Acharya
Raghu Vira Commemoration Volume (= Satapitaka Series, XCVI) (New Delhi 1973), pp. 243-253.
20. See Akira Yuyama, "Prajñā pāramitā-ratna-guna-samcaya-gātha of Haribhadra - Preliminary Remarks," Annual
Report of The International Research Institute for Advances Buddhology, IV (2000) (2001), 16 pp.
21. See Akira Yuyama, "The Inspirational Source of the Zhi-byed-pa Doctrine," Les habitants du toit du monde: Études
recueilles en hommage à Alexander Macdonald (= Recherches sur la Haute Asie, XII) (Nanterre: Société
d'ethnologie, 1997), pp. 299-307.
22. See for example, Kooichi Higuchi, "Mongolian Versions of the Saddharmapundarika from the Linguistic and
Philological Viewpoint," (1997), pp. 19-48; "sartavaki badiri; a pseudo Sanskrit Form in the Mongolian Ramajáli,"
ibid., pp. 49-68; "Mongolian Versions of the Uşnişavijaya from the Linguistic and Philological Viewpoint," (1999),
pp. 63-76; "Two Unreported Manuscripts of the Mongolian Manjuſrināmasangiti - A Preliminary Report," ibid.,
pp. 77-93.
23. See e.g. J. Verkerdi, "Some Remarks on Tibetan Prosody," Acta Orientalia Hungaricae, II, 2/3 (Budapest 1952),
pp. 221-234; cf. P. Poucha, "Le vers tibétain (I-II)," Archív Orientální, XVIII, 4 (Praha 1950), pp. 188-235; ibid.,
XXII, 4 (1954), pp. 563-585.



ISBN 81-86227-37-7
AMNYE MACHEN INSTITUTE
Tibetan Centre for Advanced Studies
McLeod Ganj 176219, Dharamsala (H.P.), India
gl7881861227374||
